---
description: How hard can it be to build a good code review platform? It's been done before, after all, and more than once!
tags: blog github
title: Git forges
---

[GitHub's CEO just announced his resignation](https://x.com/ashtom/status/1954920157853172064) and the internet is roiling with lamentations of how GitHub is going to turn to AI-infested shit now that Microsoft has fully taken over (they won't be backfilling the CEO position but will rather have leadership report directly to MSFT execs). Don't labor under that misapprehension. Lore has it that Dohmke came to MSFT via an acquisition, as did the previous CEO, Nat Friedman. When Nat took over, he managed to evince some of the hipster vibes from the early days when GitHub was cool[^Rails], but Dohmke charted another course, very much channeling MSFT leadership from the moment he took over, enthusiastically taking it upon himself to — and I quote from his personal mission statement — "boost the actual fuck out of all things AI". If his farewell post and [recent other writings](https://ashtom.github.io/developers-reinvented) are anything to go by, nothing is going to change about that.

[^Rails]: Which in turn was because it was built with Rails, and Rails was cool.

Might Microsoft end up doing a Skype here and shutting down its multi-billion dollar acquisition years later? I don't think so. Microsoft's lifeblood is developer goodwill: they want to be seen as a developer platform, and it's going to take a lot more than an AI singularity to change that. So, I'm not worried about GitHub getting shut down. At least, not for the foreseeable future (where "foreseeable" is defined as "during the next 2 to 3 years").

I am, nevertheless, worried that GitHub is going to continue going all-in on AI, and I think that's a mistake. By all means, they should integrate with AI from other vendors, and even from within MSFT itself, but not to the exclusion of _building something that is actually a useful Git forge_. AI is not GitHub's core competency. They are uniquely positioned, however, to build the best code hosting and code review platform for all the worlds' developers: at least, they would be if they were interested in doing so. Historical evidence suggests that they aren't.

I'm not the only person who thinks this way, and that's why you're now hearing rumblings of discontent. If you've been listening, the rumblings have been going on for a while now, most noticeably when MS acquired GitHub in the first place. Here's [a representative example](https://tomscii.sig7.se/2024/01/Ditching-GitHub) from well after the MS acquisition, but before Dohmke's resignation.

I myself only have a presence on GitHub for two reasons. Firstly, because it's where all the eyeballs are. This fact corresponds to a network effect that has driven a huge amount of developer tooling and practices to be created around the assumption that all code that matters is available on GitHub. The second reason is that, as a distributed VCS, Git makes it easier to do this without fully aligning with an evil corporation: you can very easily push your source code to multiple Git hosts. For me, the only real "vendor lock-in" I have to worry about is the set-up I've added do some of my repos to run CI using GitHub actions. By definition, this is nice-to-have functionality that I could live without if forced to do so, and there are alternatives out there if push comes to shove and I had to move.

So, for me, for quite a few years now, I've thought of GitHub as one mirror among several, albeit it happens to be the defacto standard location that people are going to go to first if they're looking for something; so, in my project READMEs, I end up listing GitHub first.

But I keep my eye on the competition. [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com), sadly, seems to be nothing more than a GitHub clone. [Codeberg](https://codeberg.org) is based on [Forgejo](https://forgejo.org), itself a fork of [Gitea](https://about.gitea.com), which pretty unashamedly sets out to copy everything about GitHub right down to the look and feel. [Sourchut](https://sourcehut.org) is a refreshing minimalist and anti-AI take on what a code forge should look like, eschewing forks and pull requests in favor of email-based workflows (which unfortunately raises the barrier to participation a little bit compared to the lowest common denominator approach of GitHub).

I used [Phabricator](https://www.phacility.com/phabricator/)[^phabricator] when I worked at Facebook, and I sorely miss its stack-based review flow, even though I hated using Mercurial. I also rolled out and used [Gerrit](https://www.gerritcodereview.com)[^gerrit] at a previous job, and it was powerful but not as full-featured as Phabricator (or GitHub, for that matter); that is, it was designed to make code review great, but if you needed anything like an integrated issue tracker or repo browser you were out of luck. [Graphite](https://graphite.dev) probably deserves a mention here: hopefully not too uncharitably, I'd describe it as an attempt to graft Phabricator features onto a GitHub-centered workflow made by ex-FB/ex-Meta engineers who missed being able to use Phab and were tired of waiting for GitHub to implement stacked-based review flows; it's a VC-funded startup, though, which means they are of course trying to cram in AI features, and the fact that it's built to work on top of GitHub means that it will always be hampered by the limitations of the underlying platform. Fun fact: Dohmke invested in Graphite[^angel] when he was GitHub CEO, ironically doing what he never saw fit to do with the company he was actually running (that is, building good code review tooling).

Here's a little story I don't think I've told publicly before, although I think I've probably alluded to it on Twitter, but when I joined GitHub one of my principal motivations was to bring great, Phabricator-quality code review to Pull Requests. I spent a [couple of years](https://greg.hurrell.net) trying to do that, and failed.

I spilled veritable rivers of ink trying to explain to people what made Phabricator great. I made presentations. I collected testimonials. I demonstrated workflows. I was careful to not make it all about Phabricator though. Having seen amazing code review on Git mailing list, and having used Gerrit extensively before that, I drew on examples from different sources trying to pull together the common elements that showed how different code review could be when done well. I recruited the assistance of ex-Googler's who had used Google's internal code review platform (called Critique), to argue the virtues of stacked workflows.

I was fortunate to have the support of my immediate manager, who carved out the space we needed to do a week-long "Hack House" where a small strike team assembled to sort out the details of what this could look like and build a demo. When we shared the demo, I was told by a Senior Director that it was the best demo he had ever seen at GitHub. This bought me the space I needed to produce a series of design documents, tallying to several tens of thousands of words, explaining how this could all work and how we would get there. When I said "rivers of ink", I wasn't exaggerating.

And the end result? Well, you can see it when you go to GitHub today. Most of the engineering team is trying to cram AI features into the platform, and the rest of it is working to keep the site up, and only mostly succeeding[^success]. On the fringes, you have teams rebuilding things in React in the name of replacing legacy technology, giving them a fresh chance to build something with better accessibility and performance; sometimes they actually achieve these accessibility goals, but the performance ones are a bit harder to come by, and there's the constant dance with the subtleties of reinventing wheels[^browser] that the browser supported just fine on its own when pages were mostly server-rendered HTML.

In the end, I had to desist. I got pulled into the swathe of the engineering org that was engaged in permanent availability work, and while I continued to update my documents with supporting evidence whenever it appeared, I could tell that there wasn't the will to within the leadership chain to take on any big bets in the product roadmap unless they had "Copilot" in the name.

So, it's on my bucket list to build the code review tool that I would want GitHub to be. I wouldn't actually want to displace GitHub in the market, of course, because if I did, I would immediately have to change my job title to "Chief Scaling Officer" and forget about building the thing that I actually care about, which is a code review tool, for humans. (Yeah, I'm old-fashioned in that way, and I'm willingly giving in to nostalgia: I still care about giving tools for humans to do this particular job, and I find the idea of delegating both the writing and reading of code to LLMs to be one of the least inspiring things in the world[^llms].) But yeah, I'd love to build a Git forge, even though it might have to wait until my retirement because I'm rather busy right now[^fun]. I don't know if anybody but me would use it, but it sure would feel good just using it myself.

[^phabricator]: See also this [Wikipedia article about Phabricator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phabricator) as well, in case the Phabricator site ever goes away, which is a distinct possibility now that the project is no longer actively developed (although [a fork in the form of Phorge](https://we.phorge.it) does exist).
[^gerrit]: To see it in action, look at [Gerrit's own Gerrit instance](https://gerrit-review.googlesource.com/).
[^angel]: You can see him [listed among Graphite's "angel investors" here](https://www.dev.graphite.dev/about-us). Noticeable on the list are a fair few ex-FB/ex-Meta folks.
[^success]: GitHub has long been a victim of its own success in this regard: when you're the most popular Git host, you have no choice but to build a massive team whose sole purpose is to scale Git storage.
[^browser]: Things like scrolling, and find-in-page.
[^llms]: Although, as a pragmatist, I try and extract as much value from LLMs as I can in my daily work. It's just that I don't _enjoy_ doing it.
[^fun]: Another fun fact: I actually already did build a repository browser once, back when my website used to be a Rails app. The repo browser is the easy bit, of course, but still. If you're curious, the simplest way to see what it contained would be to look at [the commit where I deleted it](https://github.com/wincent/wincent-on-rails/commit/5c367305111a5c87a0e17508e041a6d7aedfbe05). The grand irony here is that GitHub's React-based repo browser struggles a bit to render that commit, because it changes 75 files and a few thousand lines... The old version which was just server-rendered (Rails-rendered) HTML did it better.
