---
title: Frequently used Terminal commands
tags: bash zsh
cache_breaker: 1
---
Apparently this "meme" has been spreading rampantly for a while now, but I only just found out about it [http://blog.codefront.net/2008/04/18/command-history-meme/ here], [http://diveintomark.org/archives/2008/04/15/history-meme here] and [http://benjamin.smedbergs.us/blog/2008-04-15/history-meme/ here].

The idea is to see what commands appear most frequently in your [[Bash]] history using this command:

 history | awk '{a[$2]++}END{for(i in a){print a[i] " " i}}' | sort -rn | head

My results:

<pre>4598 git
641 cd
585 ls
438 rake
284 less
232 script/console
188 cap
148 ll
140 perl
118 irb</pre>

I was pretty surprised that [[Capistrano]] (`cap`) and [[perl]] rank so highly. But this is because every time I do a [[Rails]] deployment I end up doing a series of about 10 `cap` invocations (`staging deploy:check`, `staging deploy:update`, `staging deploy:migrate_all` `staging spec`, `staging deploy:restart`, and then the same all over again for the production environment). And the abundance of [[perl]] usage is due to the fact that I used it pretty heavily to do a find-and-replace over thousands-of-pages dump of the old wiki.

= Update: January 2011 =

Just for laughs, here are the results from running the command again, almost two years later:

<pre>5341 git
1005 cd
692 ls
369 less
220 open
163 bin/rspec
161 man
158 m
124 bundle
102 mv</pre>

Top 3 unchanged, `rake` completely gone (note that newcomer `bin/rspec` is probably responsible for that), `open` is surprisingly highly-ranked, `cap` gone (thank goodness), `m` ([[MacVim]] shortcut) and `bundle` are notable indices of how my software ecosystem has changed.

= Update: July 2011 =

Fairly big changes over the last months:

<pre>5635 git
837 ack
626 less
487 cd
396 ls
212 ssh
121 m
121 clear
115 put
85 vim</pre>

Less `cd` as I am tending to stick in one project directory and working on it for longer. `ssh` is way up as I am working on other hosts a lot more.

Here's the output on the host that I spend most time on:

<pre>1711 git
868 bundle
837 cd
419 less
367 ls
301 script/console
270 ruby
237 clear
214 ack
161 fg</pre>

All those `bundle` calls are from running things like `bundle exec` with things like `spec`, `rake` and `mongrel_rails`.

= Update: February 2013 =

Another couple of years pass. Now that I'm on [[Zsh]] where `history` outputs only a handful of recent items by default, I've added a numerical param to it:

<pre lang="shell">$ history -100000 | awk '{a[$2]++}END{for(i in a){print a[i] " " i}}' | sort -rn | head</pre>

Work machine:

<pre>6134 git
3524 ack
1142 less
676 ssh
429 cd
361 specr # wrapper around rspec
323 be    # this is an alias for `bundle exec`
318 rm
297 vim
270 bundle</pre>

Laptop:

<pre>1007 git
398 cd
312 less
274 ssh
124 ls
123 rm
114 vim
111 scp
109 ack
105 cat</pre>

No wonder people feel emotionally attached to Git, if it's our most frequently used tool by such an enormous margin.

= Update: October 2015 =

== Laptop ==

<pre>3586 git  # Undefeated world champion.
672 less  # 2nd, up from 3rd.
345 vim   # Highest ever showing (3rd, up from 7th).
339 cd    # Down to 4th, from 2nd.
284 ls    # Steady 5th, despite Zsh hook that auto-lists on cd.
259 rm    # Steady 6th; I like to delete.
232 npm   # Goodbye Rails, hello JS ecosystem.
230 ag    # ack, dethroned
157 man   # Apparently RTFM-ing more than ever.
146 find</pre>

== Work sandbox ==

<pre>3033 hg        # So sad.
1801 tbgs      # (Work) search tool.
931 less
623 ag         # Big code base = more searching.
511 arc
452 git
394 tgrep      # Alias wrapper around ag.
363 find|grep  # More searching: where/what is that file?
335 ls         # Less poking around, more time in (long-running) editor.
302 tgrepd     # Another alias wrapper around ag.</pre>
