---
title: Internet access problems
tags:
---
I've just moved and for the time being am without real Internet access.

Wireless access was promised but it turns out that it only works in a distant corner, far removed from my desk. Moving the desk is unfortunately not a practical option. First up let me apologise if you're waiting for a reply from me; I'll be trying to check my email and the issue tracker via a laptop, but my response times definitely won't be as fast as usual. At the time of writing I have a backlog of about 6 days.

As for how I am going to solve my access problems, I did some research looking at the relevant merits of seeking a [http://www.yoigo.com/internet/internet_para_llevar.php different paid wireless provider], trying a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Repeater repeater], an antenna (either [http://www.cantenna.com/ commercial] or [http://www.turnpoint.net/wireless/cantennahowto.html homemade]), or simply trying to [http://trac.kismac-ng.org/ jump on] nearby networks that I might be able to access.

You can't find too many repeaters on the shelves here (in Spain). The one I did find, the [http://www.linksysbycisco.com/US/en/products/WRE54G Linksys WRE54G], gets pretty mediocre reviews by all accounts.

In the end I've chosen to not pursue the repeater option and instead order an Alfa AWUS036H. It is apparently one of the most sensitive network cards on the market, works with [[Linux]] and [[Mac OS X]], and allows packet reinjection which can be useful when gathering information from/about nearby networks (needless to say, the legality of said practice will vary depending on your jurisdiction). So one way or another we'll see if this allows me to get online.

'''Update (11 June 2009, 1 week later):''' I'll be picking up the Alfa tomorrow; more details [/blog/internet-access-update here].
