---
title: Involuntary Reboot Log #26, #27 and #28
tags: involuntary.reboot.log
---
I had a couple of these saved up, but now that I've just had another [[kernel panic]] I think it's time to catch up on the backlog of the [[Involuntary Reboot Log]].

== #26: Hard reset ==

* Operating system version: 10.5.2
* Uptime at moment of failure(s): not sure

Ever since upgrading to [[Leopard]] my [[SuperDrive]] hasn't been the same. In 10.5.0 inserting a disc was enough to guarantee an eventual lock-up  of some sort, things seemed a little better in 10.5.1, and recently I decided to try out my luck with 10.5.2, but it seems things are no better.

I had been watching a [[DVD]] for about half an hour when I had to pause it and leave the room. On returning I couldn't resume playback, the player said it was "skipping damaged parts", none of the controls worked, and when I tried to quit I got the dreaded [[beachball]].

Then the keyboard stopped responding and the clock froze for about three-and-a-half minutes. When it finally came back to life I tried to reboot. From 14:18 to 14:30 I was watching a blank desktop with a spinning progress indicator. At 14:30 the progress indicator stopped and just over an hour later I decided to give up and pull the plug.

Upon rebooting [[Mail.app]] wouldn't launch but luckily I was able to repair the corruption as described in "[[Fixing corrupt SQLite database files in Mail.app]]".

== #27: Kernel panic ==

* Operating system version: 10.5.2
* Uptime at moment of failure(s): not sure

This [[kernel panic]] happened several hours into an export from [[Final Cut Pro]], and similar to last time [[Mail.app]] wouldn't launch after rebooting (but unlike last time simply retrying a few times was enough to "cure" it).

== #28: Kernel panic ==

* Operating system version: 10.5.2
* Uptime at moment of failure(s): several days

Another kernel panic when the machine was under heavy load. A zillion apps open and lots of work in progress (luckily almost all of it saved to disk, I just hope nothing got corrupted but it is too early to say). Curiously, whenever my machine panics I ''never'' get a panic log with any diagnostic information. 

I'll definitely be continuing with my daily whole-disk backups to an external volume (done with [[SuperDuper!]]) and my two-hourly [[home dir]] backups (done with `tar` and `bzip` from [[cron]], also to an external volume).

== Stats to date ==

* Kernel panics: 9
* Hard resets: 19
* Total failures: 28
* Start of recording keeping: 21 May 2006
* Total days to date: 647 days
* Average time between failures: 24.07 days

This [[iMac]] is definitely the most unreliable [[Apple]] machine I've ever owned. The average time between failures has been trending slowly downwards for months now, and is already considerably worse than the average I had on my last machine (about 30 days between failures).
