---
title: New issue tracker
tags: site
cache_breaker: 1
---
I'm just about to put the new [[issue tracker]] online. Click the "Support" link in the navigation bar to check it out.

All the old issues (bug reports, feature requests) have been imported from the old [[Bugzilla]] installation. The import isn't perfect because the source records were a mixture of plain text and [[HTML]] while the new tracker uses [[wikitext]] markup, but most of the issues came through quite well. Issue numbers have been preserved (so what was bug #640 in the old installation is still bug #640 in the new one). All the Bugzilla user accounts have been brought over too, but you'll need to select a new passphrase (go to the [[login]] page and click the "Forgot your passphrase?" link).

One of the benefits of the new site is that you no longer need separate accounts for the forums and the issue tracker; provided you signed up using the same email address for both areas on the old site you'll find that you now have a single, unified account here on the new site. The same will be true for subscribers to the old mailing lists, as soon as I've finished bringing them over.

In addition to bug reports and feature requests, I'll be using the new issue tracker for other types of customer support as well: support tickets and feedback tickets.

This is an early [[beta]] version of the tracker with only basic functionality at this point (for example, there is no search yet, and no mail-based notification of ticket updates). But as it stands I think it's already better than Bugzilla because it's so much easier to use &mdash; user-unfriendliness was always the number one complaint about Bugzilla &mdash; but I plan to add much more in the future without compromising the simplicity of the system. If you discover any problems, why not open a ticket and let me know?
