---
title: Synergy 5.0a release
tags: synergy releases mountain.lion
---
For the bold and adventurous, the new alpha preview of the next version of [[Synergy]] (5.0a) is now out. Synergy is a lightweight, highly-customizable [[iTunes]] controller.

This is a development release targeting (and requiring) [[Mac OS X]] 10.8 [[Mountain Lion]] and is 64-bit only (ie. it will only run on Macs capable of running 64-bit applications). The 4.0 stable series (currently at version 4.5.2) continues to be the recommended version for normal use, and is what you get by default if you hit [/products/synergy/download the download page]. On that same page you'll find legacy versions that can be used with older versions of the [[operating system]] right back to Mac OS X 10.2 [[Jaguar]].

A full changelog appears [/products/synergy/history here]. The version number has been bumped to 5.0a to indicate that this release breaks compatibility with older versions of the [[OS]], and with 32-bit-only Macs. It includes some fairly radical changes to the internal plumbing and some aggressive cut-backs (eg. removing stale or incomplete localizations, removing the Growl support) in order to get onto the latest and greatest Apple technologies.

This will be a free upgrade for users with a valid license for Synergy 4.0 (which means any license purchased after 5 September 2006). See [/blog/synergy-4.0-upgrades this blog post] to find out whether you qualify. If you got Synergy through the MacHeist Giving Tree bundle see  [/blog/frequently-asked-questions-about-synergy-and-macheist the MacHeist FAQ].

You can download the new release from [/l/synergy5 here] (direct link) and purchase a license using [https://secure.wincent.com/a/products/synergy-classic/purchase/ this page].
