---
tags: bash
cache_breaker: 1
---
This is my attempt to phrase the "INVOCATION" section of the [[Bash]] [[man page]] in the clearest possible terms.

= Definitions =

A "login" shell is:

* a shell whose argument zero starts with `-`; or
* a shell invoked with the `--login` or `-l` (equivalent) option

Examples of login shells:

* the shell you get when you:
** open a new terminal window
** open a new tab in a terminal window
** open a new pane in a [[tmux]] session

''Note:'' This behavior may vary according to your terminal program; it is true for [[Mac OS X]], but [http://www.joshstaiger.org/archives/2005/07/bash_profile_vs.html this article claims] the behavior is the opposite in some Linux distros.

An "interactive" shell may be:

* a login shell as described above; or
* any other shell whose standard input and output are connected to a real terminal (ie. the kind of shell you get if you type `bash` or `sh`)
* a shell started with `-i`

A "non-interactive" shell may be:

* a shell started to run a shell script
* a shell started to run a command (eg. `sh -c ls`)

= Startup behavior =

* `sh`:
** run as an interactive login shell (unless inhibited with the `--no-profile` option):
**# runs `/etc/profile`
**# runs `~/.profile`, if it exists
** run as an interactive non-login shell (eg. if you just type `sh`)
**# runs nothing
** run as a non-interactive shell with the `--login` or `-l` options:
**# runs `/etc/profile`
**# runs `~/.profile`, if it exists
* `bash`:
** run as an interactive login shell (unless inhibited with the `--no-profile` option):
**# runs `/etc/profile`
**# runs first found, readable file among `~/.bash_profile`, `~/.bash_login` and `~/.profile`
**# runs `~/.bash_logout`, if present, on logout
** run as an interactive non-login shell (eg. if you just type `bash`):
**# runs `~/.bashrc` (unless inhibited with the `--no-rc` option)
** run as a non-interactive shell with the `--login` or `-k` options:
**# runs `/etc/profile`
**# runs first found, readable file among `~/.bash_profile`, `~/.bash_login` and `~/.profile`
**# runs `~/.bash_logout`, if present, on logout
** run as a non-interactive shell (eg. `bash -c ls`):
**# runs nothing

= Consequences =

* For most intents and purposes, you can count on `~/.bash_profile` (or similar) running for pretty much any shell you open.
* It's recommended that you put base config (things like `PATH` exports) in your `~/.bashrc` and fancy stuff (prompt set-up etc) in your `~/.bash_profile`; you can source you `~/.bashrc` from your `~/.bash_profile` to that you don't have to duplicate the basic config

= See also =

* [[Zsh startup]]
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell)#Startup_scripts
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_shell
* http://www.solipsys.co.uk/new/BashInitialisationFiles.html (flowchart)
