---
tags: bugzilla updates
cache_breaker: 1
---
= Upgrade procedure =

These notes were made during the upgrade from [[Bugzilla]] 2.22 to 2.22.1:

* Run <tt>sanitycheck.cgi</tt> from within the browser.
* In the "Parameters" section set <tt>shutdownhtml</tt> to a useful value:

<pre>Currently closed for maintenance, please check back again soon.</pre>

* Back up the database:

<pre>sudo -s
mysqldump -u root -p database_name > bugzilla-20061016.sql</pre>

* Back up the installed files:

<pre>mkdir bugzilla-backup
cd path_to_bugzilla_installation
tar cf - . | (cd full_path_to_backup_directory && tar xBf -)</pre>

* Perform the actual update using [[CVS]] ([[CVS]] password is "anonymous"):

<pre>cvs login
cvs update -rBugzilla_Stable -dP</pre>

* Watch for conflicts during update; in the current case the following conflicts were reported:

<pre>Merging differences between 1.40 and 1.40.2.1 into header.html.tmpl
rcsmerge: warning: conflicts during merge
cvs update: conflicts found in template/en/default/global/header.html.tmpl</pre>

* Fix conflicts; in the example case:

<pre>cd template/en/default/global
cvs status header.html.tmpl
# (shows "File had conflicts on merge")
nano header.html.tmpl
cvs status header.html.tmpl
# (shows "Locally modified")
cd ../../../..</pre>

* Remove auxiliary files created due to the merge conflict:

<pre>find . -name "\.#*" -and -type f
find . -name "\.#*" -and -type f -exec rm "{}" \;</pre>

Or more conservatively:

<pre>find . -name "\.#*" -and -type f -ok rm "{}" \;</pre>

* Run <tt>checksetup.pl</tt> from the command line.
* Use my custom <tt>repair-bugzilla.sh</tt> to repair the ownership and permissions on the installed files.
* In the "Parameters" section empty the <tt>shutdownhtml</tt> field; in order to get there you need explicitly navigate to <tt>editparams.cgi</tt> and log in.
* Run <tt>sanitycheck.cgi</tt> from within the browser.
* Test the installation.
* Remove backup files:

<pre>sudo rm -r full_path_to_backup_directory
sudo rm full_path_to_database_dumpfile</pre>

= Future improvements =

This process could be largely automated via a shell script.

= See also =

* http://www.bugzilla.org/releases/2.22.1/release-notes.html
