---
tags: development os.x
---
In the past I've always offered a single version of my software products that runs on as many versions of [[Mac OS X]] as possible. This brings with it a certain simplicity (users don't have to care about which version to download and install) but it comes at a cost (tying your application to older versions of the operating system can make it difficult or even impossible to use newer [[APIs]]).

So with the release of [[Leopard]] I am finally going to [[branch]] and offer multiple versions of my products, with each [[branch]] being tied to a particular minimum version of [[Mac OS X]].

To minimize the complexity for customers I want my download page to make a best guess at what operating system they are running and offer the appropriate download as the top choice. You'll notice this kind of customization if you try to download [[QuickTime]] or [[iTunes]] from Apple (which tries to offer you the appropriate download for your platform), or [[Firefox]] from [[Mozilla]] (which additionally tries to offer you the appropriate language variant).

= [[WebKit]] based browsers =

It turns out that browser and operating system detection based on [[user agent strings]] is a bit of a minefield but thanks to [http://developer.apple.com/internet/safari/uamatrix.html this handy page] maintained by [[Apple]] determining visitor OS version is relatively straightforward for [[WebKit]]-based browsers.

In summary:

* [[Jaguar]] corresponds to Safari versions 1.0 through 1.0.3, WebKit versions 85.7 through 85.8.5.
* [[Panther]] corresponds to Safari versions 1.1 through 1.3.2, WebKit versions 100 through 312.8.1.
* [[Tiger]] corresponds to Safari versions 2.0 through 2.0.4, WebKit versions 412 through 419.
* [[Leopard]] numbers are not yet available (as of March 2007).

So checking the [[WebKit]] version number in the [[user agent string]] will provide a reliable way of determining the visitor OS version for people running [[Safari]] and may also work for other browsers that use [[WebKit]] such as [[OmniWeb]].

Needless to say these [[user agent strings]] should only ever be taken as advisory, not definitive, and you should always offer your users alternative choices in the event that the auto-detected default turns out to be something other than what they want.

= [[Gecko]]-based browsers =

After the [[WebKit]] based browsers [[Firefox]] is probably the most popular. It's native sibling, [[Camino]], is also powered by the [[Gecko]] rendering engine and has a sizeable minority following. As far as I know [[Firefox]] runs on any version of [[Mac OS X]] from [[Jaguar]] and up so there is no easy way to detect operating system based solely on the version number, although if the [[user agent string]] indicates an [[Intel]] processor then we know that the visitor is running at least [[Tiger]].

= [[Internet Explorer]] =

Not updated in years this browser is now so old that it's probably not worth considering.

= [[Opera]] =

Quite popular on other platforms, [[Opera]] for [[Mac OS X]] is much less important, numerically speaking. For the time being I won't be making any effort to auto-detect the visitor's operating system for users running [[Opera]].

= [[iCab]] =

Another minority browser probably not worth supporting.

= Resources =

* "Safari Developer FAQ": http://developer.apple.com/internet/safari/faq.html
* "Safari and WebKit Version Information": http://developer.apple.com/internet/safari/uamatrix.html
