---
tags: safari
---
[[Apple]]'s [[Safari]] comes with lightning-fast built-in [[PDF]] viewing support. If you ever make the mistake of installing Adobe's Acrobat software (in free or paid forms) then you'll find that Adobe has installed a bloated, slow, beachballing, almost unusable plug-in of its own which overrides the excellent built-in one.

A quick [[Google]] search on the topic reveals a large number of links on how to get back the superior behaviour:

* http://www.theronge.com/2006/02/02/how-to-remove-adobe-pdf-view-from-safari/
* http://www.mcld.co.uk/blog/blog.php?110
* http://forums.macosxhints.com/archive/index.php/t-56848.html

The best information appears to be in this article:

* http://www.macfixit.com/article.php?story=20070404013904547

= Problems =

When I fired up Adobe Acrobat and went to the "Internet" section of the preferences I was dismayed to see that the checkbox for disabling the plug-in was ghosted out. I thought that this was likely because I was running from an unprivileged non-administrator account as is my custom. So I fired up the [[Terminal]] and launched Acrobat again using [[sudo]]; I was now able to disable the checkbox.

But when I fired up [[Safari]] I saw that it continued to use the unwanted plug-in and on launching Acrobat I saw that the checkbox was again ghosted and checked.

I tried temporarily granting administrator privileges to my daily use account, but the checkbox was still ghosted.

Some of the hints out there suggest merely deleting the plugin itself (at <tt>/Library/Internet Plug-Ins/AdobePDFViewer.plugin</tt>) but [http://kb.adobe.com/selfservice/viewContent.do?externalId=333545&sliceId=1 this Adobe article] notes:

<blockquote>If the AdobePDFViewer files are deleted, then they will be self-healed after you start Acrobat again after the files were deleted. You can also fix Safari manually by choosing Help > Repair Acrobat Installation.</blockquote>

In other words, if you fix the infection, Adobe is likely to reinfect your system all over again under the guise of this unwanted "self-healing".

= The solution =

The solution was to manually move the plug-in into <tt>/Library/Internet Plug-Ins/Disabled Plug-Ins/</tt>. From that point on, Safari fell back to the built-in support, the Acrobat preferences showed the checkbox as unchecked, and the "self-healing" feature did not kick in and "fix" my installation.

Even this solution, however, wasn't straight forward. Even from my administrator account I couldn't drag or even copy the plug-in into the <tt>Disabled Plug-Ins</tt> folder. It turns out that the folder was owned by <tt>root</tt> but its group was another user (my other administrator account). The only item in the folder was a plug-in named <tt>Windows Media Plugin</tt> (surprise, surprise). I believe the folder should have been created with user:group <tt>root:admin</tt>. Let's blame Microsoft, shall we?

So I changed the group of the folder to <tt>admin</tt> and was then able to move the unwanted plug-in inside using the Finder after authenticating (actually this consisted of a copy followed by a deletion of the old version, due to the way the permissions system interacts with the Finder).
