---
tags: email sendmail
cache_breaker: 1
---
This example shows how to add a [[DNS-based blacklist]] to the [[sendmail]] configuration file. In this case the SBL-XBL list provided by [[Spamhaus]], one of the most reputable and accurate blacklists, is used for the purposes of illustration.

<pre>FEATURE(`dnsbl',`sbl-xbl.spamhaus.org',`"554 Rejected " $&{client_addr} " - see http://www.spamhaus.org/ then contact " $&{postmaster_addr}')dnl</pre>

To minimize the damage done in the unlikely event of obtaining a false positive the error message that is returned to the client includes the following elements:

* A 554 error code (as described in [[RFC 821]]/[[RFC 2821]]).
* The connecting IP address found in the blacklist.
* A link to the [[Spamhaus]] website where the sender can find out what the blacklisting means, why it occurred, and how to be removed from the blacklist.
* An alternative contact address of the form <tt>postmaster@[[example.com]]</tt> that can be used to inform the server administrator, bypassing [[DNS-based blacklist]] checks.

This specification depends on a special ruleset that defines the <tt>postmaster_addr</tt> macro (see "[[Store postmaster address]]"), as well as the modification of the following line in the configuration file:

<pre>dnl FEATURE(delay_checks)dnl</pre>

Which should be changed to:

<pre>FEATURE(`delay_checks', `friend')dnl</pre>

After making these changes the [[Sendmail]] configuration should be rebuilt and the daemon restarted.

Appropriate entries should be added to the <tt>/etc/mail/access</tt> file to ensure that delivery to the <tt>postmaster</tt> and <tt>abuse</tt> addresses is not blocked by the blacklist:

<pre>Spam:abuse@	        &rarr;FRIEND
Spam:postmaster@	&rarr;FRIEND</pre>

To test that the blacklisting works correctly, messages can be sent to [mailto:nelson-sbl-test@crynwr.com nelson-sbl-test@crynwr.com] and [mailto:nelson-xbl-test@crynwr.com nelson-xbl-test@crynwr.com].

To test that the postmaster address is ''not'' being subjected to DNS-based blacklisting (a requirement of [[RFC 2821]]) you can connect via telnet from the server to be tested to:

telnet://ns1.crynwr.com

The telnet-based test will try sending mail to "postmaster@[[example.com]]", and should the messages should be accepted for delivery.

= Efficacy =

During a test period of 24 hours in mid-July 2006 on the [[wincent.com]] mail server the [[DNS-based blacklist]] described here stopped 261 connection attempts.

For other efficacy statistics see [[combatting spam]].

= See also =

* "Crynwr spam blocking resources": http://www.crynwr.com/spam/
* "postmaster.rfc-ignorant.org listing policy": http://rfc-ignorant.org/policy-postmaster.php
* http://www.spamhaus.org/
* List of DNS-based blacklists: http://spamlinks.net/filter-dnsbl-lists.htm
