---
tags: ruby rails
---
These notes were made while trying to put together my first ever [[Rails]] project. I recorded the steps taken so that it would be easier for me to repeat them in the future. I later expanded and improved upon these notes in "[[Rails application bootstrapping]]", and then went on to refine them further in "[[Behaviour-Driven Development with Rails]]".

= Basic setup =

# Install and run [[Locomotive]].
# Choose "Create New…" from the [[Locomotive]] "File" menu.
# Choose "Edit in TextMate" from the "File" menu.
# In the Terminal, change to your [[Rails]] project's application root.
# Run <tt>command `locomotive bash-environment`</tt> to enable command line manipulation.
# Set up your initial databases as described in "[[Using SQLite for Ruby on Rails development on Mac OS X Tiger]]"; skip over the "Manual database creation" step.

= Creating your database files =

# Create initial databases and an empty schema

<pre>rake db_schema_dump</pre>

This will occur in the default (development) environment. Repeat for the other environments and then restore the <tt>RAILS_ENV</tt> to its original value.

<pre>export RAILS_ENV=production
rake db_schema_dump
export RAILS_ENV=test
rake db_schema_dump
export RAILS_ENV=development</pre>

Alternatively using the <tt>env</tt> command:

<pre>env RAILS_ENV=production rake db_schema_dump
env RAILS_ENV=test rake db_schema_dump
env RAILS_ENV=development rake db_schema_dump</pre>

# Creating your first table:

One way of doing this:

<pre>script/generate model wikis</pre>

This command actually creates the first migration file in db/migrate.

From:

<pre>class CreateWikis < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def self.up
    create_table :wikis do |t|
      #t.column :name, :string
    end
  end

  def self.down
    drop_table :wikis
  end
end</pre>

To:

<pre>class CreateWikis < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def self.up
    create_table :wikis do |table|
      table.column :name, :string
    end
  end

  def self.down
    drop_table :wikis
  end
end</pre>

<pre>rake migrate</pre>

Adding columns to a table:

<pre>script/generate migration weblogs</pre>

<pre>class Weblogs < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def self.up
  end

  def self.down
  end
end</pre>

<pre>class Weblogs < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def self.up
    create_table :weblogs do |table|
      table.column :name, :string
    end
  end

  def self.down
    drop_table :weblogs
  end
end</pre>

<pre>rake migrate</pre>

== Keeping <tt>db/schema.rb</tt> automatically in sync during migrations ==

In the file, <tt>config/environment.rb</tt>, change:

<pre>  # Use SQL instead of Active Record's schema dumper when creating the test database.
  # This is necessary if your schema can't be completely dumped by the schema dumper, 
  # like if you have constraints or database-specific column types
  # config.active_record.schema_format = :sql</pre>

To:

<pre>  # Use SQL instead of Active Record's schema dumper when creating the test database.
  # This is necessary if your schema can't be completely dumped by the schema dumper, 
  # like if you have constraints or database-specific column types
  config.active_record.schema_format = :ruby</pre>

== Adding a column to an existing table ==

<pre>script/generate migration add_creation_date_to_weblogs</pre>

<pre>class AddCreationDateToWeblogs < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def self.up
    add_column "weblogs", "created", :datetime
  end

  def self.down
    remove_column "weblogs", "created"
  end
end</pre>

<pre>rake migrate</pre>

= The main controller =

<pre>script/generate controller main welcome</pre>

In <tt>config/routes.rb</tt>

<pre>map.connect '', :controller => 'main', :action => 'welcome'</pre>

And delete <tt>public/index.html</tt>

= Creating a scaffold =

<pre>script/generate scaffold weblog</pre>

(Accessible at <nowiki>"http://localhost:3000/weblogs/"</nowiki>).

= Creating a base layout (used site-wide) =

Create a file at <tt>app/views/layouts/application.rhtml</tt>, indicating where included content should go with <tt><%= @content_for_layout %></tt>. For example:

<pre><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
	"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" version="-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" xml:lang="en">
<head>
	<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
	<title><%= @page_title %></title>
</head>
<body>
<%= @content_for_layout %>
</body>
</html></pre>

= See also =

* "UsingMigrations": http://wiki.rubyonrails.org/rails/pages/UsingMigrations
* "UnderstandingMigrations": http://wiki.rubyonrails.com/rails/pages/UnderstandingMigrations
* "Using migrations to evolve your database schema without loosing [sic] your data": http://media.rubyonrails.org/video/migrations.mov
* "Using Ruby on Rails for Web Development on Mac OS X": http://developer.apple.com/tools/rubyonrails.html
