---
tags: git wiki
---

From the official announcement to the [Git mailing list](/wiki/Git_mailing_list):

    A release candidate Git 1.7.2-rc2 is available at the usual places
    for testing:

     http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/

     git-1.7.2.rc2.tar.{gz,bz2}			(source tarball)
     git-htmldocs-1.7.2.rc2.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)
     git-manpages-1.7.2.rc2.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)

    The RPM binary packages for a few architectures are found in:

     testing/git-*-1.7.2.rc2-1.fc11.$arch.rpm	(RPM)


    Git v1.7.2 Release Notes (draft)
    ================================

    Updates since v1.7.1
    --------------------

    * core.eol configuration and text/eol attributes are the new way to control
      the end of line conventions for files in the working tree.

    * core.autocrlf has been made safer - it will now only handle line
      endings for new files and files that are LF-only in the
      repository. To normalize content that has been checked in with
      CRLF, use the new eol/text attributes.

    * The whitespace rules used in "git apply --whitespace" and "git diff"
      gained a new member in the family (tab-in-indent) to help projects with
      policy to indent only with spaces.

    * When working from a subdirectory, by default, git does not look for its
      metadirectory ".git" across filesystems, primarily to help people who
      have invocations of git in their custom PS1 prompts, as being outside
      of a git repository would look for ".git" all the way up to the root
      directory, and NFS mounts are often slow.  DISCOVERY_ACROSS_FILESYSTEM
      environment variable can be used to tell git not to stop at a
      filesystem boundary.

    * Usage help messages generated by parse-options library (i.e. most
      of the Porcelain commands) are sent to the standard output now.

    * ':/<string>' notation to look for a commit now takes regular expression
      and it is not anchored at the beginning of the commit log message
      anymore (this is a backward incompatible change).

    * "git" wrapper learned "-c name=value" option to override configuration
      variable from the command line.

    * Improved portability for various platforms including older SunOS,
      HP-UX 10/11, AIX, Tru64, etc. and platforms with Python 2.4.

    * The message from "git am -3" has been improved when conflict
      resolution ended up making the patch a no-op.

    * "git blame" applies the textconv filter to the contents it works
      on, when available.

    * "git checkout --orphan newbranch" is similar to "-b newbranch" but
      prepares to create a root commit that is not connected to any existing
      commit.

    * "git cherry-pick" learned to pick a range of commits
      (e.g. "cherry-pick A..B" and "cherry-pick --stdin"), so did "git
      revert"; these do not support the nicer sequencing control "rebase
      [-i]" has, though.

    * "git cherry-pick" and "git revert" learned --strategy option to specify
      the merge strategy to be used when performing three-way merges.

    * "git cvsserver" can be told to use pserver; its password file can be
      stored outside the repository.

    * The output from the textconv filter used by "git diff" can be cached to
      speed up their reuse.

    * "git diff --word-diff=<mode>" extends the existing "--color-words"
      option, making it more useful in color-challenged environments.

    * The regexp to detect function headers used by "git diff" for PHP has
      been enhanced for visibility modifiers (public, protected, etc.) to
      better support PHP5.

    * "diff.noprefix" configuration variable can be used to implicitly
      ask for "diff --no-prefix" behaviour.

    * "git for-each-ref" learned "%(objectname:short)" that gives the object
      name abbreviated.

    * "git format-patch" learned --signature option and format.signature
      configuration variable to customize the e-mail signature used in the
      output.

    * Various options to "git grep" (e.g. --count, --name-only) work better
      with binary files.

    * "git grep" learned "-Ovi" to open the files with hits in your editor.

    * "git help -w" learned "chrome" and "chromium" browsers.

    * "git log --decorate" shows commit decorations in various colours.

    * "git log --follow <path>" follows across copies (it used to only follow
      renames).  This may make the processing more expensive.

    * "git log --pretty=format:<template>" specifier learned "% <something>"
      magic that inserts a space only when %<something> expands to a
      non-empty string; this is similar to "%+<something>" magic, but is
      useful in a context to generate a single line output.

    * "git notes prune" learned "-n" (dry-run) and "-v" options, similar to
      what "git prune" has.

    * "git patch-id" can be fed a mbox without getting confused by the
      signature line in the format-patch output.

    * "git remote" learned "set-branches" subcommand.

    * "git rev-list A..B" learned --ancestry-path option to further limit
      the result to the commits that are on the ancestry chain between A and
      B (i.e. commits that are not descendants of A are excluded).

    * "git show -5" is equivalent to "git show --do-walk 5"; this is similar
      to the update to make "git show master..next" walk the history,
      introduced in 1.6.4.

    * "git status [-s] --ignored" can be used to list ignored paths.

    * "git status -s -b" shows the current branch in the output.

    * "git status" learned "--ignore-submodules" option.

    * Various "gitweb" enhancements and clean-ups, including syntax
      highlighting, "plackup" support for instaweb, .fcgi suffix to run
      it as FastCGI script, etc.

    * The test harness has been updated to produce TAP-friendly output.


    Fixes since v1.7.1
    ------------------

    All of the fixes in v1.7.1.X maintenance series are included in this
    release, unless otherwise noted.

    * We didn't URL decode "file:///path/to/repo" correctly when path/to/repo
      had percent-encoded characters (638794c, 9d2e942, ce83eda, 3c73a1d).

    * "git clone" did not configure remote.origin.url correctly for bare
      clones (df61c889).

    * "git diff --graph" works better with "--color-words" and other options
      (81fa024..4297c0a).

    * "git diff" could show ambiguous abbreviation of blob object names on
      its "index" line (3e5a188).

    * "git reset --hard" started from a wrong directory and a working tree in
      a nonstandard location is in use got confused (560fb6a1).

    ----------------------------------------------------------------

    Changes since v1.7.2-rc1 are as follows:

    Brandon Casey (2):
         t/t9700/test.pl: don't access private object members, use public access methods
         t/t0006: specify timezone as EST5 not EST to comply with POSIX

    Chris Packham (1):
         Documentation/git-gc.txt: add reference to githooks

    Dylan Reid (1):
         xdiff: optimise for no whitespace difference when ignoring whitespace.

    Heiko Voigt (1):
         add missing && to submodule-merge testcase

    Jakub Narebski (1):
         gitweb: Move evaluate_gitweb_config out of run_request

    Jeff King (3):
         t0006: test timezone parsing
         parse_date: fix signedness in timezone calculation
         test-date: fix sscanf type conversion

    Jonathan Nieder (1):
         t/README: document more test helpers

    Junio C Hamano (4):
         Updates from the list to 1.7.2 Release Notes
         t/README: proposed rewording...
         backmerge a few more fixes to 1.7.1.X series
         Git 1.7.2-rc2

    Michael J Gruber (1):
         rerere.txt: Document forget subcommand

    Pierre Habouzit (1):
         fix git branch -m in presence of cross devices

    Uwe Kleine-König (1):
         rev-parse: fix --parse-opt --keep-dashdash --stop-at-non-option

    Ævar Arnfjörð Bjarmason (13):
         test-lib: Adjust output to be valid TAP format
         test-lib: Make the test_external_* functions TAP-aware
         test-lib: output a newline before "ok" under a TAP harness
         tests: Skip tests in a way that makes sense under TAP
         tests: Say "pass" rather than "ok" on empty lines for TAP
         t9700: Use Test::More->builder, not $Test::Builder::Test
         t/README: The trash is in 't/trash directory.$name'
         t/README: Typo: paralell -> parallel
         t/README: Document the prereq functions, and 3-arg test_*
         t/README: Document test_external*
         t/README: Document test_expect_code
         t/README: Add a section about skipping tests
         t/README: Document the do's and don'ts of tests
