---
tags: git
---
= Documentation =

The documentation for [[Git]] is ''stunningly'' good, ranging from its concise and useful [[man pages]] through to tutorials and the user manual:

* Man pages: http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/
* Tutorial:
** Part 1: http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/tutorial.html
** Part 2: http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/tutorial-2.html
** Core (for developers): http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/core-tutorial.html
* Overview: http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/everyday.html
* User manual: http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/user-manual.html
* Documentation list on wiki: http://git.or.cz/gitwiki/GitDocumentation
* [[Wiki]]: http://git.or.cz/gitwiki
* Howtos: http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/howto-index.html
* Glossary: http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/glossary.html
* Third party tutorials and advocacy:
** http://utsl.gen.nz/talks/git-svn/intro.html

For more links, see "[[Git documentation]]".

I would rate the documentation as being on par with [[Subversion]]'s (excellent) documentation, which is very fortunate considering Git's complexity and the learning curve necessary (primarily to unlearn patterns picked up from working with other [[version control systems]] and then relearn things "the Git way").

The [http://marc.info/?l=git mailing list] often provides very interesting background information that goes into much greater depth than is possible with the end-user documentation.

= Active development =

[[Git]] is a excellent [[version control system]] ''and'' it was written by [[Linus Torvalds]]; these two factors make Git extremely attractive to [[Linux]] enthusiasts, already renowned for their enthusiasm. As a result Git boasts probably the single most active developer community among the [[open source]] version control systems, streets ahead of [[SVK]] (which is mostly developed and maintained by a single person) and possibly even more than [[Subversion]] (which numerically speaking probably has a significantly higher number of ''users'' but not ''developers'').

Git is being constantly updated and improved. It very rapidly achieved a high level of sophistication, feature-completeness, and it's proved its mettle managing large projects such as the Linux kernel itself. Despite already being a very capable and efficient tool, [http://repo.or.cz/w/git.git/ improvement is rapid and ongoing].

= Content-tracking rather than file-tracking =

Whereas every other [[version control system]] in the world tracks file history (when lines were added to a file, when lines were removed, when a file was renamed, added or deleted etc) [[Git]] doesn't explicitly track this information in any way at all. It instead tracks ''content'' within a repository. By walking the repository history Git ''can'' reconstruct what happened to a particular file, but this is an ''extrapolation'' from the data rather than something explicitly encoded.

This is a radical departure that means that when you do something like cutting a method from one file and pasting it into another then the history of the method goes along with it (think <tt>svn blame</tt>). This is explained by [[Linus Torvalds]] in [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.version-control.git/37975 this post]; see also [http://marc.info/?l=git&m=114123702826251 this separate post] on tracking renames.

<blockquote>First off, let's just posit that "files" do not matter. The only thing that matters is how "content" moved in the tree. Ok? If I copy a function from one file to another, the perfect SCM will notice that, and show it as a diff that removes it from one file and adds it to another, and is _still_ able to track authorship past the move.</blockquote>

Source: http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.version-control.git/217

= Performance =

While [[Git]] shares many or all of the advantages of [[SVK]] there is one area in which it excels: performance. Whereas SVK is written in [[Perl]], [[Git]] is largely written in [[C]]; specifically, the lower level "plumbing" is written in C and some of the higher-level "porcelain" is written higher-level (but slower) scripting languages. The "heavy lifting", however, is all done in C and is correspondingly fast. There is a [[Google]] "Summer of Code" project fro replacing some of the core scripts with C versions (see http://code.google.com/soc/2007/git/appinfo.html?csaid=BB370B5D857FA7A).

= Low barrier to participation =

It is incredibly easy to start managing code with [[Git]]. Unlike [[Subversion]] there is no need to set up a repository on a (possibly remote) server before starting to work. Git is even simpler than [[SVK]], because what would normally be considered a "working copy" actually becomes a (distributed) repository itself, containing both the "working copy" and all of the history of the repository (this is different from [[SVK]], where working copies are separate from repositories, which are typically mirrored under <tt>~/.svk</tt>).

= Visualization =

[[Git]] makes [[branching]] and [[merging]] very cheap and easy operations, and (fortunately) comes with the visualization tools necessary to understand and manage projects with many branches and merges. [[gitk]] is a simple [[GUI]] repository browser and [[QGit]] is somewhat more advanced one; both permit visualization of repository history (including branches, merges, tree state, diffs). I am not aware of any tools for [[Subversion]] or [[SVK]], for example, which rival the sophistication of these tools (especially QGit).

= See also =

* [[SVK advantages]]
