---
tags: git wiki
cache_breaker: 1
---

From the official announcement posted to the [Git mailing list](/wiki/Git_mailing_list):

    The latest feature release Git 1.7.4 is available at the usual
    places:

     http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/

     git-1.7.4.tar.{gz,bz2}			(source tarball)
     git-htmldocs-1.7.4.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)
     git-manpages-1.7.4.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)

    The RPM binary packages for a few architectures are found in:

     RPMS/$arch/git-*-1.7.4-1.fc13.$arch.rpm	(RPM)

    Git v1.7.4 Release Notes
    ========================

    Updates since v1.7.3
    --------------------

    * The documentation Makefile now assumes by default asciidoc 8 and
      docbook-xsl >= 1.73. If you have older versions, you can set
      ASCIIDOC7 and ASCIIDOC_ROFF, respectively.

    * The option parsers of various commands that create new branches (or
      rename existing ones to a new name) were too loose and users were
      allowed to give a branch a name that begins with a dash by creative
      abuse of their command line options, which only led to burning
      themselves.  The name of a branch cannot begin with a dash now.

    * System-wide fallback default attributes can be stored in
      /etc/gitattributes; the core.attributesfile configuration variable can
      be used to customize the path to this file.

    * The thread structure generated by "git send-email" has changed
      slightly.  Setting the cover letter of the latest series as a reply
      to the cover letter of the previous series with --in-reply-to used
      to make the new cover letter and all the patches replies to the
      cover letter of the previous series; this has been changed to make
      the patches in the new series replies to the new cover letter.

    * The Bash completion script in contrib/ has been adjusted to be usable with
      Bash 4 (options with '=value' didn't complete).  It has been also made
      usable with zsh.

    * Different pagers can be chosen depending on which subcommand is
      being run under the pager, using the "pager.<subcommand>" variable.

    * The hardcoded tab-width of 8 that is used in whitespace breakage checks is now
      configurable via the attributes mechanism.

    * Support of case insensitive filesystems (i.e. "core.ignorecase") has
      been improved.  For example, the gitignore mechanism didn't pay attention
      to case insensitivity.

    * The <tree>:<path> syntax for naming a blob in a tree, and the :<path>
      syntax for naming a blob in the index (e.g. "master:Makefile",
      ":hello.c") have been extended.  You can start <path> with "./" to
      implicitly have the (sub)directory you are in prefixed to the
      lookup.  Similarly, ":../Makefile" from a subdirectory would mean
      "the Makefile of the parent directory in the index".

    * "git blame" learned the --show-email option to display the e-mail
      addresses instead of the names of authors.

    * "git commit" learned the --fixup and --squash options to help later invocation
      of interactive rebase.

    * Command line options to "git cvsimport" whose names are in capital
      letters (-A, -M, -R and -S) can now be specified as the default in
      the .git/config file by their longer names (cvsimport.authorsFile,
      cvsimport.mergeRegex, cvsimport.trackRevisions, cvsimport.ignorePaths).

    * "git daemon" can be built in the MinGW environment.

    * "git daemon" can take more than one --listen option to listen to
      multiple addresses.

    * "git describe --exact-match" was optimized not to read commit
      objects unnecessarily.

    * "git diff" and "git grep" learned what functions and subroutines
      in Fortran, Pascal and Perl look like.

    * "git fetch" learned the "--recurse-submodules" option.

    * "git mergetool" tells vim/gvim to show a three-way diff by default
      (use vimdiff2/gvimdiff2 as the tool name for old behavior).

    * "git log -G<pattern>" limits the output to commits whose change has
      added or deleted lines that match the given pattern.

    * "git read-tree" with no argument as a way to empty the index is
      deprecated; we might want to remove it in the future.  Users can
      use the new --empty option to be more explicit instead.

    * "git repack -f" does not spend cycles to recompress objects in the
      non-delta representation anymore (use -F if you really mean it
      e.g. after you changed the core.compression variable setting).

    * "git merge --log" used to limit the resulting merge log to 20
      entries; this is now customizable by giving e.g. "--log=47".

    * "git merge" may work better when all files were moved out of a
      directory in one branch while a new file is created in place of that
      directory in the other branch.

    * "git merge" learned the "--abort" option, synonymous to
      "git reset --merge" when a merge is in progress.

    * "git notes" learned the "merge" subcommand to merge notes refs.
      In addition to the default manual conflict resolution, there are
      also several notes merge strategies for automatically resolving
      notes merge conflicts.

    * "git rebase --autosquash" can use SHA-1 object names to name the
      commit which is to be fixed up (e.g. "fixup! e83c5163").

    * The default "recursive" merge strategy learned the --rename-threshold
      option to influence the rename detection, similar to the -M option
      of "git diff".  From the "git merge" frontend, the "-X<strategy option>"
      interface, e.g. "git merge -Xrename-threshold=50% ...", can be used
      to trigger this.

    * The "recursive" strategy also learned to ignore various whitespace
      changes; the most notable is -Xignore-space-at-eol.

    * "git send-email" learned "--to-cmd", similar to "--cc-cmd", to read
      the recipient list from a command output.

    * "git send-email" learned to read and use "To:" from its input files.

    * you can extend "git shell", which is often used on boxes that allow
      git-only login over ssh as login shell, with a custom set of
      commands.

    * The current branch name in "git status" output can be colored differently
      from the generic header color by setting the "color.status.branch" variable.

    * "git submodule sync" updates metainformation for all submodules,
      not just the ones that have been checked out.

    * gitweb can use a custom 'highlight' command with its configuration file.

    * other gitweb updates.


    Also contains various documentation updates.


    Fixes since v1.7.3
    ------------------

    All of the fixes in the v1.7.3.X maintenance series are included in this
    release, unless otherwise noted.

    * "git log --author=me --author=her" did not find commits written by
      me or by her; instead it looked for commits written by me and by
      her, which is impossible.

    * "git push --progress" shows progress indicators now.

    * "git rebase -i" showed a confusing error message when given a
      branch name that does not exist.

    * "git repack" places its temporary packs under $GIT_OBJECT_DIRECTORY/pack
      instead of $GIT_OBJECT_DIRECTORY/ to avoid cross directory renames.

    * "git submodule update --recursive --other-flags" passes flags down
      to its subinvocations.


    ----------------------------------------------------------------

    Changes since v1.7.3 are as follows:

    Adam Tkac (1):
         Don't pass "--xhtml" to hightlight in gitweb.perl script.

    Alan Raison (1):
         contrib/hooks/post-receive-email: fix return values from prep_for_email

    Alejandro R. Sedeño (1):
         Add --force to git-send-email documentation

    Aleksi Aalto (1):
         status: show branchname with a configurable color

    Alexander Sulfrian (2):
         daemon: add helper function named_sock_setup
         daemon: allow more than one host address given via --listen

    Alexandre Erwin Ittner (1):
         gitk: Add Brazilian Portuguese (pt-BR) translation

    Alexey Shumkin (1):
         userdiff: match Pascal class methods

    Anders Kaseorg (6):
         apply: Recognize epoch timestamps with : in the timezone
         describe: Use for_each_rawref
         describe: Do not use a flex array in struct commit_name
         describe: Store commit_names in a hash table by commit SHA1
         describe: Delay looking up commits until searching for an inexact match
         Mark gitk script executable

    Andreas Gruenbacher (1):
         Clarify and extend the "git diff" format documentation

    Andreas Köhler (1):
         submodule sync: Update "submodule.<name>.url" for empty directories

    Andrew Waters (1):
         Fix handling of git-p4 on deleted files

    Antonio Ospite (3):
         t/t9001-send-email.sh: fix stderr redirection in 'Invalid In-Reply-To'
         git-send-email.perl: make initial In-Reply-To apply only to first email
         t/t9001-send-email.sh: fix '&&' chain in some tests

    Bert Wesarg (1):
         Documentation: update-index: -z applies also to --index-info

    Björn Steinbrink (1):
         Correctly report corrupted objects

    Brandon Casey (13):
         userdiff.c: add builtin fortran regex patterns
         t/t3903-stash: improve testing of git-stash show
         builtin/revert.c: don't dereference a NULL pointer
         wt-status.c: don't leak directory entries when processing untracked,ignored
         git-send-email.perl: ensure $domain is defined before using it
         diffcore-pickaxe.c: remove unnecessary curly braces
         diffcore-pickaxe.c: a void function shouldn't try to return something
         test-lib.sh/test_decode_color(): use octal not hex in awk script
         Makefile: add NO_FNMATCH_CASEFOLD to IRIX sections
         t9001: use older Getopt::Long boolean prefix '--no' rather than '--no-'
         trace.c: ensure NULL is not passed to printf
         t0001,t1510,t3301: use sane_unset which always returns with status 0
         t3032: limit sed branch labels to 8 characters

    Brian Gernhardt (3):
         git-stash: fix flag parsing
         t/gitweb-lib: Don't pass constant to decode_utf8
         t6022: Use -eq not = to test output of wc -l

    Christian Couder (1):
         t6050 (replace): fix bogus "fetch branch with replacement" test

    Christoph Mallon (1):
         diff --check: correct line numbers of new blank lines at EOF

    Christopher Wilson (1):
         Enable highlight executable path as a configuration option

    Clemens Buchacher (15):
         add rebase patch id tests
         do not search functions for patch ID
         t7607: use test-lib functions and check MERGE_HEAD
         t7607: add leading-path tests
         add function check_ok_to_remove()
         lstat_cache: optionally return match_len
         do not overwrite files in leading path
         do not overwrite untracked during merge from unborn branch
         use persistent memory for rejected paths
         t7607: use test-lib functions and check MERGE_HEAD
         t7607: add leading-path tests
         add function check_ok_to_remove()
         lstat_cache: optionally return match_len
         do not overwrite files in leading path
         use persistent memory for rejected paths

    Cliff Frey (1):
         documentation: git-config minor cleanups

    Dan McGee (3):
         mergetool-lib: combine vimdiff and gvimdiff run blocks
         mergetool-lib: add a three-way diff view for vim/gvim
         mergetool-lib: make the three-way diff the default for vim/gvim

    Daniel Knittl-Frank (1):
         Improvements to `git checkout -h`

    David Barr (3):
         fast-import: Allow filemodify to set the root
         fast-import: insert new object entries at start of hash bucket
         fast-import: let importers retrieve blobs

    David Kågedal (1):
         git-blame.el: Add (require 'format-spec)

    Diego Elio Pettenò (1):
         imap-send: link against libcrypto for HMAC and others

    Elijah Newren (54):
         Document pre-condition for tree_entry_interesting
         tree-walk: Correct bitrotted comment about tree_entry()
         tree_entry_interesting(): Make return value more specific
         diff_tree(): Skip skip_uninteresting() when all remaining paths interesting
         t3509: Add rename + D/F conflict testcase that recursive strategy fails
         merge-recursive: D/F conflicts where was_a_dir/file -> was_a_dir
         t6032: Add a test checking for excessive output from merge
         t6022: Add test combinations of {content conflict?, D/F conflict remains?}
         t6022: Add tests for reversing order of merges when D/F conflicts present
         t6022: Add tests with both rename source & dest involved in D/F conflicts
         t6022: Add paired rename+D/F conflict: (two/file, one/file) -> (one, two)
         t6022: Add tests for rename/rename combined with D/F conflicts
         t6020: Modernize style a bit
         t6020: Add a testcase for modify/delete + directory/file conflict
         t6036: Test index and worktree state, not just that merge fails
         t6036: Add a second testcase similar to the first but with content changes
         t6036: Add testcase for undetected conflict
         merge-recursive: Small code clarification -- variable name and comments
         merge-recursive: Rename conflict_rename_rename*() for clarity
         merge-recursive: Nuke rename/directory conflict detection
         merge-recursive: Move rename/delete handling into dedicated function
         merge-recursive: Move delete/modify handling into dedicated function
         merge-recursive: Move process_entry's content merging into a function
         merge-recursive: New data structures for deferring of D/F conflicts
         merge-recursive: New function to assist resolving renames in-core only
         merge-recursive: Have process_entry() skip D/F or rename entries
         merge-recursive: Structure process_df_entry() to handle more cases
         merge-recursive: Update conflict_rename_rename_1to2() call signature
         merge-recursive: Update merge_content() call signature
         merge-recursive: Avoid doubly merging rename/add conflict contents
         merge-recursive: Move handling of double rename of one file to two
         merge-recursive: Move handling of double rename of one file to other file
         merge-recursive: Delay handling of rename/delete conflicts
         merge-recursive: Delay content merging for renames
         merge-recursive: Delay modify/delete conflicts if D/F conflict present
         conflict_rename_delete(): Check whether D/F conflicts are still present
         conflict_rename_rename_1to2(): Fix checks for presence of D/F conflicts
         merge_content(): Check whether D/F conflicts are still present
         handle_delete_modify(): Check whether D/F conflicts are still present
         merge-recursive: Make room for directories in D/F conflicts
         merge-recursive: Remove redundant path clearing for D/F conflicts
         t3020 (ls-files-error-unmatch): remove stray '1' from end of file
         t4017 (diff-retval): replace manual exit code check with test_expect_code
         t100[12] (read-tree-m-2way, read_tree_m_u_2way): add missing &&
         t4002 (diff-basic): use test_might_fail for commands that might fail
         t4202 (log): Replace '<git-command> || :' with test_might_fail
         t4019 (diff-wserror): add lots of missing &&
         t4026 (color): remove unneeded and unchained command
         t5602 (clone-remote-exec): add missing &&
         t6016 (rev-list-graph-simplify-history): add missing &&
         t7001 (mv): add missing &&
         t7601 (merge-pull-config): add missing &&
         t7800 (difftool): add missing &&
         Introduce sane_unset and use it to ensure proper && chaining

    Eric Sunshine (5):
         Side-step sed line-ending "corruption" leading to t6038 failure.
         Side-step MSYS-specific path "corruption" leading to t5560 failure.
         Fix 'clone' failure at DOS root directory.
         Fix Windows-specific macro redefinition warning.
         Add MinGW-specific execv() override.

    Eric Wong (1):
         Documentation/git-svn: discourage "noMetadata"

    Erik Faye-Lund (23):
         mingw: do not crash on open(NULL, ...)
         do not depend on signed integer overflow
         inet_ntop: fix a couple of old-style decls
         mingw: use real pid
         mingw: support waitpid with pid > 0 and WNOHANG
         mingw: add kill emulation
         daemon: use run-command api for async serving
         daemon: use full buffered mode for stderr
         daemon: get remote host address from root-process
         mingw: import poll-emulation from gnulib
         mingw: use poll-emulation from gnulib
         daemon: use socklen_t
         daemon: make --inetd and --detach incompatible
         daemon: opt-out on features that require posix
         msvc: opendir: fix malloc-failure
         msvc: opendir: allocate enough memory
         msvc: opendir: do not start the search
         win32: dirent: handle errors
         msvc: opendir: handle paths ending with a slash
         win32: use our own dirent.h
         mingw: do not set errno to 0 on success
         help: always suggest common-cmds if prefix of cmd
         exec_cmd: remove unused extern

    Federico Cuello (1):
         Fix git-apply with -p greater than 1

    Gabriel Corona (2):
         t5550: test HTTP authentication and userinfo decoding
         Fix username and password extraction from HTTP URLs

    Giuseppe Bilotta (16):
         gitweb: use fullname as hash_base in heads link
         gitweb: introduce remote_heads feature
         gitweb: git_get_heads_list accepts an optional list of refs
         gitweb: separate heads and remotes lists
         gitweb: nagivation menu for tags, heads and remotes
         gitweb: allow action specialization in page header
         gitweb: remotes view for a single remote
         gitweb: refactor repository URL printing
         gitweb: provide a routine to display (sub)sections
         gitweb: group remote heads by remote
         git instaweb: enable remote_heads
         web--browse: coding style
         web--browse: split valid_tool list
         web--browse: support opera, seamonkey and elinks
         web--browse: better support for chromium
         CodingGuidelines: mention whitespace preferences for shell scripts

    Greg Brockman (4):
         Allow creation of arbitrary git-shell commands
         Add interactive mode to git-shell for user-friendliness
         Add sample commands for git-shell
         shell: Display errors from improperly-formatted command lines

    Ilari Liusvaara (4):
         Add bidirectional_transfer_loop()
         git-remote-fd
         git-remote-ext
         remote-fd/ext: finishing touches after code review

    Jakub Narebski (14):
         t/gitweb-lib.sh: Use GIT_BUILD_DIR
         t/gitweb-lib.sh: Use tabs for indent consistently
         gitweb: Move call to evaluate_git_version after evaluate_gitweb_config
         t/gitweb-lib.sh: Add support for GITWEB_TEST_INSTALLED
         gitweb/Makefile: Add 'test' and 'test-installed' targets
         gitweb/Makefile: Include gitweb/config.mak
         gitweb: Fix test of highlighting support in t9500
         gitweb: Fix bug in evaluate_path_info
         gitweb: Improve behavior for actionless path_info gitweb URLs
         gitweb: Time::HiRes is in core for Perl 5.8
         gitweb: selectable configurations that change with each request
         gitweb: Fix handling of whitespace in generated links
         gitweb: Introduce esc_attr to escape attributes of HTML elements
         gitweb: Include links to feeds in HTML header only for '200 OK' response

    Jan Krüger (3):
         read-tree: deprecate syntax without tree-ish args
         repack: add -F flag to let user choose between --no-reuse-delta/object
         Documentation: pack.compression: explain how to recompress

    Jari Aalto (2):
         git-commit.txt: (synopsis): move -i and -o before "--"
         git-pull.txt: Mention branch.autosetuprebase

    Jeff King (27):
         diff: don't use pathname-based diff drivers for symlinks
         prefer test -h over test -L in shell scripts
         rev-list: handle %x00 NUL in user format
         tests: factor out terminal handling from t7006
         tests: test terminal output to both stdout and stderr
         push: pass --progress down to git-pack-objects
         docs: give more hints about how "add -e" works
         config: treat non-existent config files as empty
         diff: report bogus input to -C/-M/-B
         apply: don't segfault on binary files with missing data
         docs: clarify git diff modes of operation
         docs: give more hints about how "add -e" works
         document sigchain api
         log.decorate: accept 0/1 bool values
         allow command-specific pagers in pager.<cmd>
         reflogs: clear flags properly in corner case
         docs: default to more modern toolset
         default color.status.branch to "same as header"
         tests: add some script lint checks
         tests: flip executable bit on t9158
         handle arbitrary ints in git_config_maybe_bool
         t2107: mark passing test as success
         ident: die on bogus date format
         docs: explain diff.*.binary option
         rebase: use explicit "--" with checkout
         rebase: give a better error message for bogus branch
         tests: sanitize more git environment variables

    Jens Lehmann (6):
         pull: Remove --tags option from manpage
         clone: Add the --recurse-submodules option as alias for --recursive
         fetch/pull: Add the --recurse-submodules option
         Add the 'fetch.recurseSubmodules' config setting
         Submodules: Add the "fetchRecurseSubmodules" config option
         git submodule: Remove now obsolete tests before cloning a repo

    Jiang Xin (1):
         Fix typo in git-gc document.

    Jim Meyering (1):
         mailmap: fix use of freed memory

    Joe Perches (2):
         git-send-email.perl: Add --to-cmd
         git-send-email.perl: Deduplicate "to:" and "cc:" entries with names

    Johan Herland (23):
         notes.c: Hexify SHA1 in die() message from init_notes()
         (trivial) notes.h: Minor documentation fixes to copy_notes()
         notes.h: Make default_notes_ref() available in notes API
         notes.c: Reorder functions in preparation for next commit
         notes.h/c: Allow combine_notes functions to remove notes
         notes.h/c: Propagate combine_notes_fn return value to add_note() and beyond
         (trivial) t3303: Indent with tabs instead of spaces for consistency
         notes.c: Use two newlines (instead of one) when concatenating notes
         builtin/notes.c: Split notes ref DWIMmery into a separate function
         git notes merge: Initial implementation handling trivial merges only
         builtin/notes.c: Refactor creation of notes commits.
         git notes merge: Handle real, non-conflicting notes merges
         git notes merge: Add automatic conflict resolvers (ours, theirs, union)
         Documentation: Preliminary docs on 'git notes merge'
         git notes merge: Manual conflict resolution, part 1/2
         git notes merge: Manual conflict resolution, part 2/2
         git notes merge: List conflicting notes in notes merge commit message
         git notes merge: --commit should fail if underlying notes ref has moved
         git notes merge: Add another auto-resolving strategy: "cat_sort_uniq"
         git notes merge: Add testcases for merging notes trees at different fanouts
         Provide 'git notes get-ref' to easily retrieve current notes ref
         cmd_merge(): Parse options before checking MERGE_HEAD
         Provide 'git merge --abort' as a synonym to 'git reset --merge'

    Johannes Schindelin (3):
         Make sure that git_getpass() never returns NULL
         Fix typo in pack-objects' usage
         merge-octopus: Work around environment issue on Windows

    Johannes Sixt (6):
         t7300: add a missing SYMLINKS prerequisite
         apply --whitespace=fix: fix tab-in-indent
         Make the tab width used for whitespace checks configurable
         Avoid duplicate test number t7609
         Fix expected values of setup tests on Windows
         t/README: hint about using $(pwd) rather than $PWD in tests

    Jon Seymour (2):
         stash: fix git stash branch regression when branch creation fails
         stash: simplify parsing fixes

    Jonathan "Duke" Leto (1):
         Correct help blurb in checkout -p and friends

    Jonathan Nieder (89):
         merge-recursive: expose merge options for builtin merge
         ll-merge: replace flag argument with options struct
         t0004 (unwritable files): simplify error handling
         environment.c: remove unused variable
         setup: make sure git dir path is in a permanent buffer
         init: plug tiny one-time memory leak
         xdiff: cast arguments for ctype functions to unsigned char
         commit-tree: free commit message before exiting
         Documentation: No argument of ALLOC_GROW should have side-effects
         Documentation: gitrevisions is in section 7
         Documentation: diff can compare blobs
         Documentation: expand 'git diff' SEE ALSO section
         Documentation: update implicit "--no-index" behavior in "git diff"
         t4203 (mailmap): stop hardcoding commit ids and dates
         send-pack: avoid redundant "pack-objects died with strange error"
         test-lib: allow test code to check the list of declared prerequisites
         test_terminal: catch use without TTY prerequisite
         test_terminal: ensure redirections work reliably
         fast-import: filemodify after M 040000 <tree> "" crashes
         fast-import: tighten M 040000 syntax
         t9300 (fast-import): another test for the "replace root" feature
         fast-import: do not clear notes in do_change_note_fanout()
         user-manual: remote-tracking can be checked out, with detached HEAD
         Documentation: document show -s
         tests: add missing &&
         tests: add missing &&, batch 2
         test-lib: introduce test_line_count to measure files
         t6022 (renaming merge): chain test commands with &&
         t1502 (rev-parse --parseopt): test exit code from "-h"
         t1400 (update-ref): use test_must_fail
         t3301 (notes): use test_expect_code for clarity
         t3404 (rebase -i): unroll test_commit loops
         t3404 (rebase -i): move comment to description
         t3404 (rebase -i): introduce helper to check position of HEAD
         t4124 (apply --whitespace): use test_might_fail
         apply: handle patches with funny filename and colon in timezone
         cherry-pick/revert: transparently refresh index
         wrapper: move xmmap() to sha1_file.c
         wrapper: move odb_* to environment.c
         path helpers: move git_mkstemp* to wrapper.c
         strbuf: move strbuf_branchname to sha1_name.c
         wrapper: give zlib wrappers their own translation unit
         pack-objects: mark file-local variable static
         Remove pack file handling dependency from wrapper.o
         Documentation: split gitignore page into sections
         Documentation: point to related commands from gitignore
         Describe various forms of "be quiet" using OPT__QUIET
         vcs-svn: Error out for v3 dumps
         fast-import: treat SIGUSR1 as a request to access objects early
         git-rev-parse.txt: clarify --git-dir
         gitweb: document $per_request_config better
         fast-import: stricter parsing of integer options
         fast-import: clarify documentation of "feature" command
         fast-import: Allow cat-blob requests at arbitrary points in stream
         add: introduce add.ignoreerrors synonym for add.ignore-errors
         Documentation: do not misinterpret pull refspec as bold text
         git submodule -b ... of current HEAD fails
         Makefile: dependencies for vcs-svn tests
         parse-options: clearer reporting of API misuse
         parse-options: move NODASH sanity checks to parse_options_check
         parse-options: sanity check PARSE_OPT_NOARG flag
         parse-options: never suppress arghelp if LITERAL_ARGHELP is set
         parse-options: allow git commands to invent new option types
         parse-options: make resuming easier after PARSE_OPT_STOP_AT_NON_OPTION
         update-index: migrate to parse-options API
         treap: make treap_insert return inserted node
         vcs-svn: fix intermittent repo_tree corruption
         Makefile: transport-helper uses thread-utils.h
         t9300: avoid short reads from dd
         bash: simple reimplementation of _get_comp_words_by_ref
         t9300: use perl "head -c" clone in place of "dd bs=1 count=16000" kluge
         t0050: fix printf format strings for portability
         t0001: test git init when run via an alias
         diff: funcname and word patterns for perl
         gitweb: skip logo in atom feed when there is none
         gitweb: make logo optional
         daemon: support <directory> arguments again
         t9010: svnadmin can fail even if available
         ll-merge: simplify opts == NULL case
         Documentation/fast-import: capitalize beginning of sentence
         remote-ext: do not segfault for blank lines
         Documentation/fast-import: put explanation of M 040000 <dataref> "" in context
         tests: cosmetic improvements to the repo-setup test
         tests: compress the setup tests
         Documentation: do not treat reset --keep as a special case
         Subject: setup: officially support --work-tree without --git-dir
         t1510: fix typo in the comment of a test
         fast-import: treat filemodify with empty tree as delete
         rebase -i: clarify in-editor documentation of "exec"

    Joshua Jensen (6):
         Add string comparison functions that respect the ignore_case variable.
         Case insensitivity support for .gitignore via core.ignorecase
         Add case insensitivity support for directories when using git status
         Add case insensitivity support when using git ls-files
         Support case folding for git add when core.ignorecase=true
         Support case folding in git fast-import when core.ignorecase=true

    Junio C Hamano (59):
         gitdiffcore doc: update pickaxe description
         diff: pass the entire diff-options to diffcore_pickaxe()
         git log/diff: add -G<regexp> that greps in the patch text
         diff/log -G<pattern>: tests
         grep: move logic to compile header pattern into a separate helper
         log --author: take union of multiple "author" requests
         disallow branch names that start with a hyphen
         CodingGuidelines: spell Arithmetic Expansion with $(($var))
         Git 1.7.3.1
         MinGW: avoid collisions between "tags" and "TAGS"
         Start 1.7.4 cycle
         merge-recursive: Restructure showing how to chain more process_* functions
         Martin Langhoff has a new e-mail address
         Make test script t9157 executable
         CodingGuidelines: reword parameter expansion section
         shell portability: no "export VAR=VAL"
         t4203: do not let "git shortlog" DWIM based on tty
         merge-recursive:make_room_for_directories - work around dumb compilers
         Git 1.7.3.2
         core.abbrevguard: Ensure short object names stay unique a bit longer
         read_sha1_file(): report correct name of packfile with a corrupt object
         A loose object is not corrupt if it cannot be read due to EMFILE
         t9001: send-email interation with --in-reply-to and --chain-reply-to
         test: git-apply -p2 rename/chmod only
         t3404: do not use 'describe' to implement test_cmp_rev
         t3402: test "rebase -s<strategy> -X<opt>"
         Update draft release notes to 1.7.4
         Documentation: Fix mark-up of lines with more than one tilde
         Git 1.7.0.8
         Update draft release notes to 1.7.4
         t9300: remove unnecessary use of /dev/stdin
         Git 1.7.3.3
         t9119: do not compare "Text Last Updated" line from "svn info"
         Do not link with -lcrypto under NO_OPENSSL
         t9010 fails when no svn is available
         get_sha1: teach ":$n:<path>" the same relative path logic
         Documentation/git.txt: update list of maintenance releases
         fetch_populated_submodules(): document dynamic allocation
         thread-utils.h: simplify the inclusion
         Prepare for 1.7.3.4
         Relnotes: remove items fixed on 'maint'
         get_sha1_oneline: fix lifespan rule of temp_commit_buffer variable
         Prepare for 1.7.3.4
         Git 1.6.4.5
         Update draft release notes to 1.7.4
         commit: die before asking to edit the log message
         set_try_to_free_routine(NULL) means "do nothing special"
         am --abort: keep unrelated commits since the last failure and warn
         t0021: avoid getting filter killed with SIGPIPE
         rebase --skip: correctly wrap-up when skipping the last patch
         userdiff/perl: catch BEGIN/END/... and POD as headers
         Prepare for 1.7.3.5
         Git 1.7.4-rc0
         Git 1.7.3.5
         Git 1.7.4-rc1
         Git 1.7.4-rc2
         Documentation updates for 'GIT_WORK_TREE without GIT_DIR' historical usecase
         Git 1.7.4-rc3
         Git 1.7.4

    Justin Frankel (2):
         merge-recursive --patience
         merge-recursive: options to ignore whitespace changes

    Kevin Ballard (13):
         merge-recursive: option to specify rename threshold
         diff: add synonyms for -M, -C, -B
         completion: Support the DWIM mode for git checkout
         blame: Add option to show author email instead of name
         Update test script annotate-tests.sh to handle missing/extra authors
         test-lib: extend test_decode_color to handle more color codes
         diff: handle lines containing only whitespace and tabs better
         submodule: preserve all arguments exactly when recursing
         submodule: only preserve flags across recursive status/update invocations
         status: Quote paths with spaces in short format
         rebase: better rearranging of fixup!/squash! lines with --autosquash
         rebase: teach --autosquash to match on sha1 in addition to message
         diff: add --detect-copies-harder as a synonym for --find-copies-harder

    Kevin P. Fleming (1):
         post-receive-email: ensure sent messages are not empty

    Kirill Smelkov (8):
         gitk: Show notes by default (like git log does)
         user-manual: be consistent in illustrations to 'git rebase'
         blame,cat-file: Prepare --textconv tests for correctly-failing conversion program
         blame,cat-file: Demonstrate --textconv is wrongly running converter on symlinks
         blame,cat-file --textconv: Don't assume mode is ``S_IFREF | 0664''
         setup: make sure git_dir path is in a permanent buffer, getenv(3) case
         t/t8006: Demonstrate blame is broken when cachetextconv is on
         fill_textconv(): Don't get/put cache if sha1 is not valid

    Linus Torvalds (1):
         Fix missing 'does' in man-page for 'git checkout'

    Mark Lodato (3):
         completion: make compatible with zsh
         completion: fix zsh check under bash with 'set -u'
         fsck docs: remove outdated and useless diagnostic

    Markus Duft (2):
         add support for the SUA layer (interix; windows)
         Interix: add configure checks

    Martin Storsjö (1):
         Improve the mingw getaddrinfo stub to handle more use cases

    Martin von Zweigbergk (7):
         rebase -X: do not clobber strategy
         Documentation/git-pull: clarify configuration
         rebase: support --verify
         rebase --abort: do not update branch ref
         rebase: only show stat if configured to true
         Use reflog in 'pull --rebase . foo'
         completion: add missing configuration variables

    Mathias Lafeldt (1):
         git-svn: fix processing of decorated commit hashes

    Matthieu Moy (12):
         update comment and documentation for :/foo syntax
         diff: trivial fix for --output file error message
         Better "Changed but not updated" message in git-status
         Replace "remote tracking" with "remote-tracking"
         Change remote tracking to remote-tracking in non-trivial places
         everyday.txt: change "tracking branch" to "remote-tracking branch"
         Change "tracking branch" to "remote-tracking branch"
         Change incorrect uses of "remote branch" meaning "remote-tracking"
         Change incorrect "remote branch" to "remote tracking branch" in C code
         user-manual.txt: explain better the remote(-tracking) branch terms
         git-branch.txt: mention --set-upstream as a way to change upstream configuration
         commit: suggest --amend --reset-author to fix commiter identity

    Michael J Gruber (26):
         git-reset.txt: clarify branch vs. branch head
         git-reset.txt: reset does not change files in target
         git-reset.txt: reset --soft is not a no-op
         git-reset.txt: use "working tree" consistently
         git-reset.txt: point to git-checkout
         git-reset.txt: make modes description more consistent
         remote-helpers: build in platform independent directory
         contrib/completion: --no-index option to git diff
         user-manual: fix anchor name Finding-comments-With-given-Content
         rev-list-options: clarify --parents and --children
         t5503: fix typo
         git-show-ref.txt: clarify the pattern matching
         test: allow running the tests under "prove"
         t/t7004-tag: test handling of rfc1991 signatures
         verify-tag: factor out signature detection
         tag: factor out sig detection for body edits
         tag: factor out sig detection for tag display
         tag: recognize rfc1991 signatures
         cvsimport: partial whitespace cleanup
         git-rm.txt: Fix quoting
         t800?-blame.sh: retitle uniquely
         git-difftool.txt: correct the description of $BASE and describe $MERGED
         difftool: provide basename to external tools
         t1020-subdirectory: test alias expansion in a subdirectory
         cvsimport: handle the parsing of uppercase config options
         RelNotes/1.7.4: minor fixes

    Mike Pape (3):
         mingw: add network-wrappers for daemon
         mingw: implement syslog
         compat: add inet_pton and inet_ntop prototypes

    Nathan W. Panike (1):
         Fix a formatting error in git-merge.txt

    Nguyễn Thái Ngọc Duy (68):
         branch -h: show usage even in an invalid repository
         checkout-index -h: show usage even in an invalid repository
         commit/status -h: show usage even with broken configuration
         gc -h: show usage even with broken configuration
         ls-files -h: show usage even with corrupt index
         merge -h: show usage even with corrupt index
         update-index -h: show usage even with corrupt index
         dir.c: fix EXC_FLAG_MUSTBEDIR match in sparse checkout
         add: do not rely on dtype being NULL behavior
         clean: avoid quoting twice
         clean: remove redundant variable baselen
         get_cwd_relative(): do not misinterpret root path
         builtins: print setup info if repo is found
         Add t1510 and basic rules that run repo setup
         t1510: setup case #0
         t1510: setup case #1
         t1510: setup case #2
         t1510: setup case #3
         t1510: setup case #4
         t1510: setup case #5
         t1510: setup case #6
         t1510: setup case #7
         t1510: setup case #8
         t1510: setup case #9
         t1510: setup case #10
         t1510: setup case #11
         t1510: setup case #12
         t1510: setup case #13
         t1510: setup case #14
         t1510: setup case #15
         t1510: setup case #16
         t1510: setup case #17
         t1510: setup case #18
         t1510: setup case #19
         t1510: setup case #20
         t1510: setup case #21
         t1510: setup case #22
         t1510: setup case #23
         t1510: setup case #24
         t1510: setup case #25
         t1510: setup case #26
         t1510: setup case #27
         t1510: setup case #28
         t1510: setup case #29
         t1510: setup case #30
         t1510: setup case #31
         cache.h: realign and use (1 << x) form for CE_* constants
         dir.c: add free_excludes()
         unpack-trees: move all skip-worktree checks back to unpack_trees()
         entry.c: remove "checkout-index" from error messages
         unpack-trees: fix sparse checkout's "unable to match directories"
         Revert "excluded_1(): support exclude files in index"
         setup: save prefix (original cwd relative to toplevel) in startup_info
         Make prefix_path() return char* without const
         get_sha1: support relative path ":path" syntax
         get_sha1_oneline: make callers prepare the commit list to traverse
         get_sha1: support $commit^{/regex} syntax
         get_sha1: handle special case $commit^{/}
         Add git_config_early()
         Use git_config_early() instead of git_config() during repo setup
         setup: limit get_git_work_tree()'s to explicit setup case only
         setup: clean up setup_bare_git_dir()
         setup: clean up setup_discovered_git_dir()
         setup: rework setup_explicit_git_dir()
         Remove all logic from get_git_work_tree()
         Revert "Documentation: always respect core.worktree if set"
         git.txt: correct where --work-tree path is relative to
         setup_work_tree: adjust relative $GIT_WORK_TREE after moving cwd

    Nicolas Pitre (2):
         diff: don't presume empty file when corresponding object is missing
         make pack-objects a bit more resilient to repo corruption

    Pascal Obry (3):
         Minor indentation fix.
         Remove @smtp_host_parts variable as not used.
         New send-email option smtpserveroption.

    Pat Notz (8):
         strbuf.h: fix comment typo
         dir.c: squelch false uninitialized memory warning
         commit: helper methods to reduce redundant blocks of code
         pretty.c: teach format_commit_message() to reencode the output
         commit: --fixup option for use with rebase --autosquash
         add tests of commit --fixup
         commit: --squash option for use with rebase --autosquash
         add tests of commit --squash

    Pat Thoyts (13):
         MinGW: fix stat() and lstat() implementations for handling symlinks
         MinGW: Report errors when failing to launch the html browser.
         Skip t1300.70 and 71 on msysGit.
         Do not strip CR when grepping HTTP headers.
         Skip 'git archive --remote' test on msysGit
         git-am: fix detection of absolute paths for windows
         git-gui: show command-line errors in a messagebox on Windows
         git-gui: enable the Tk console when tracing/debugging on Windows
         git-gui: generic version trimming
         git-gui: use full dialog width for old name when renaming branch
         git-gui: correct assignment of work-tree
         git-gui: use wordprocessor tab style to ensure tabs work as expected
         git-gui: apply color information from git diff output

    Pete Wyckoff (1):
         convert filter: supply path to external driver

    Peter Krefting (1):
         gitk: Update Swedish translation (290t)

    Peter van der Does (1):
         bash: get --pretty=m<tab> completion to work with bash v4

    Petr Onderka (1):
         Add global and system-wide gitattributes

    Ralf Thielow (1):
         commit.c: Remove backward goto in read_craft_line()

    Ralf Wildenhues (1):
         Fix typos in the documentation

    Ramkumar Ramachandra (11):
         shell: Rewrite documentation and improve error message
         t4014-format-patch: Call test_tick before committing
         format-patch: Don't go over merge commits
         fmt_merge_msg: Change fmt_merge_msg API to accept shortlog_len
         merge: Make '--log' an integer option for number of shortlog entries
         merge: Make 'merge.log' an integer or boolean option
         t6200-fmt-merge-msg: Exercise 'merge.log' to configure shortlog length
         t6200-fmt-merge-msg: Exercise '--log' to configure shortlog length
         SubmittingPatches: Document some extra tags used in commit messages
         Porcelain scripts: Rewrite cryptic "needs update" error message
         t9010 (svn-fe): Eliminate dependency on svn perl bindings

    Ramsay Allan Jones (20):
         t1503: Fix arithmetic expansion syntax error when using dash
         msvc: Fix compilation errors in compat/win32/sys/poll.c
         msvc: git-daemon.exe: Fix linker "unresolved externals" error
         msvc: Fix build by adding missing INTMAX_MAX define
         msvc: Fix macro redefinition warnings
         t3600-rm.sh: Don't pass a non-existent prereq to test #15
         t9142: Move call to start_httpd into the setup test
         lib-git-svn.sh: Avoid setting web server variables unnecessarily
         lib-git-svn.sh: Add check for mis-configured web server variables
         t9501-*.sh: Fix a test failure on Cygwin
         difftool: Fix failure on Cygwin
         t3419-*.sh: Fix arithmetic expansion syntax error
         lib-git-svn.sh: Move web-server handling code into separate function
         t9157-*.sh: Add an svn version check
         t6038-*.sh: Pass the -b (--binary) option to sed on cygwin
         t3032-*.sh: Pass the -b (--binary) option to sed on cygwin
         t3032-*.sh: Do not strip CR from line-endings while grepping on MinGW
         t4135-*.sh: Skip the "backslash" tests on cygwin
         t9157-*.sh: Make the svn version check more precise
         svndump.c: Fix a printf format compiler warning

    René Scharfe (10):
         diff: avoid repeated scanning while looking for funcname
         work around buggy S_ISxxx(m) implementations
         add description parameter to OPT__VERBOSE
         add description parameter to OPT__DRY_RUN
         add description parameter to OPT__QUIET
         add OPT__FORCE
         archive: improve --verbose description
         branch: improve --verbose description
         verify-tag: document --verbose
         close file on error in read_mmfile()

    Robin H. Johnson (2):
         Fix false positives in t3404 due to SHELL=/bin/false
         t9001: Fix test prerequisites

    SZEDER Gábor (7):
         bisect: improve error message of 'bisect log' while not bisecting
         bisect: improve error msg of 'bisect reset' when original HEAD is deleted
         bisect: check for mandatory argument of 'bisect replay'
         bash: offer refs for 'git bisect start'
         bash: not all 'git bisect' subcommands make sense when not bisecting
         bash: support more 'git notes' subcommands and their options
         bash: support pretty format aliases

    Santi Béjar (1):
         parse-remote: handle detached HEAD

    Schalk, Ken (1):
         t3030: Add a testcase for resolvable rename/add conflict with symlinks

    Sebastian Schuberth (3):
         MinGW: Use pid_t more consequently, introduce uid_t for greater compatibility
         MinGW: Add missing file mode bit defines
         On Windows, avoid git-gui to call Cygwin's nice utility

    Shawn O. Pearce (2):
         Use git_open_noatime when accessing pack data
         Work around EMFILE when there are too many pack files

    Stefan Haller (2):
         gitk: Prevent the text pane from becoming editable
         gitk: Make text selectable on Mac

    Stephen Boyd (4):
         send-email: Use To: headers in patch files
         send-email: Don't leak To: headers between patches
         parse-options: Don't call parse_options_check() so much
         parse-options: do not infer PARSE_OPT_NOARG from option type

    StephenB (1):
         git svn: fix the final example in man page

    Steven Walter (2):
         git-svn: check_cherry_pick should exclude commits already in our history
         git-svn: allow the mergeinfo property to be set

    Sven Eckelmann (1):
         contrib/ciabot: git-describe commit instead of HEAD

    Sylvain Rabot (2):
         gitweb: add extensions to highlight feature map
         gitweb: remove unnecessary test when closing file descriptor

    Tay Ray Chuan (14):
         smart-http: Don't change POST to GET when following redirect
         t5523-push-upstream: add function to ensure fresh upstream repo
         t5523-push-upstream: test progress messages
         format-patch: page output with --stdout
         t5550-http-fetch: add missing '&&'
         t5550-http-fetch: add test for http-fetch
         shift end_url_with_slash() from http.[ch] to url.[ch]
         url: add str wrapper for end_url_with_slash()
         http-backend: use end_url_with_slash()
         http-push: Normalise directory names when pushing to some WebDAV servers
         http-push: check path length before using it
         http-push: add trailing slash at arg-parse time, instead of later on
         http-fetch: rework url handling
         bash completion: add basic support for git-reflog

    Thiago Farina (3):
         commit: Add commit_list prefix in two function names.
         builtin/branch.c: Use ALLOC_GROW instead of alloc_nr and xrealloc.
         builtin/rm.c: Use ALLOC_GROW instead of alloc_nr and xrealloc.

    Thomas Rast (12):
         send-email: Refuse to send cover-letter template subject
         prefix_filename(): safely handle the case where pfx_len=0
         merge-file: correctly find files when called in subdir
         repack: place temporary packs under .git/objects/pack/
         {cvs,svn}import: use the new 'git read-tree --empty'
         t0003: properly quote $HOME
         gitk: Add the equivalent of diff --color-words
         userdiff: fix typo in ruby and python word regexes
         Documentation/git-archive: spell --worktree-attributes correctly
         Documentation/githooks: post-rewrite-copy-notes never existed
         submodule: fix relative url parsing for scp-style origin
         t0000: quote TAP snippets in test code

    Tomas Carnecky (1):
         stash drops the stash even if creating the branch fails because it already exists

    Tony Luck (1):
         Better advice on using topic branches for kernel development

    Torsten Bögershausen (1):
         t9143: do not fail when unhandled.log.gz is not created

    Uwe Kleine-König (2):
         get_author_ident_from_commit(): remove useless quoting
         Documentation/git-clone: describe --mirror more verbosely

    Vasyl' Vavrychuk (1):
         trace.c: mark file-local function static

    Wesley J. Landaker (1):
         Documentation: Refer to git-commit-tree in git-filter-branch help

    Yann Dirson (5):
         t/t3415: use && where applicable.
         Fix copy-pasted comments related to tree diff handling.
         Keep together options controlling the behaviour of diffcore-rename.
         Document that rev-list --graph triggers parent rewriting.
         diff: use "find" instead of "detect" as prefix for long forms of -M and -C

    knittl (1):
         bash: Match lightweight tags in prompt

    Ævar Arnfjörð Bjarmason (25):
         send-email: use catfile() to concatenate files
         Makefile: add CC to TRACK_CFLAGS
         perl: bump the required Perl version to 5.8 from 5.6.[21]
         perl: use "use warnings" instead of -w
         send-email: use lexical filehandle for opendir
         send-email: use lexical filehandles for $compose
         send-email: use lexical filehandles during sending
         send-email: get_patch_subject doesn't need a prototype
         send-email: file_declares_8bit_cte doesn't need a prototype
         send-email: unique_email_list doesn't need a prototype
         send-email: cleanup_compose_files doesn't need a prototype
         send-email: use \E***\Q instead of \*\*\*
         send-email: sanitize_address use $foo, not "$foo"
         send-email: sanitize_address use qq["foo"], not "\"foo\""
         send-email: use (?:) instead of () if no match variables are needed
         send-email: send_message die on $!, not $?
         send-email: make_message_id use "require" instead of "use"
         send-email: use Perl idioms in while loop
         send-email: is_rfc2047_quoted use qr// regexes
         send-email: extract_valid_address use qr// regexes
         Makefile & configure: add a NO_FNMATCH flag
         Makefile & configure: add a NO_FNMATCH_CASEFOLD flag
         test-lib: make test_expect_code a test command
         t7004-tag.sh: re-arrange git tag comment for clarity
         tests: use test_cmp instead of piping to diff(1)

    Štěpán Němec (8):
         Use angles for placeholders consistently
         Fix odd markup in --diff-filter documentation
         Use parentheses and `...' where appropriate
         Remove stray quotes in --pretty and --format documentation
         Put a space between `<' and argument in pack-objects usage string
         Fix {update,checkout}-index usage strings
         CodingGuidelines: Add a section on writing documentation
         diff,difftool: Don't use the {0,2} notation in usage strings

# See also

-   [Updating to Git 1.7.4](/wiki/Updating_to_Git_1.7.4)
