---
tags: git
---
= Official announcement =

<pre>The latest maintenance release GIT 1.6.2.2 is available at the
usual places:

 http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/

 git-1.6.2.2.tar.{gz,bz2}			(source tarball)
 git-htmldocs-1.6.2.2.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)
 git-manpages-1.6.2.2.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)

The RPM binary packages for a few architectures are found in:

 RPMS/$arch/git-*-1.6.2.2-1.fc9.$arch.rpm	(RPM)

Mostly documentation updates with a few bugfixes.

----------------------------------------------------------------

GIT v1.6.2.2 Release Notes
==========================

Fixes since v1.6.2.1
--------------------

* A longstanding confusing description of what --pickaxe option of
 git-diff does has been clarified in the documentation.

* "git-blame -S" did not quite work near the commits that were given
 on the command line correctly.

* "git diff --pickaxe-regexp" did not count overlapping matches
 correctly.

* "git diff" did not feed files in work-tree representation to external
 diff and textconv.

* "git-fetch" in a repository that was not cloned from anywhere said
 it cannot find 'origin', which was hard to understand for new people.

* "git-format-patch --numbered-files --stdout" did not have to die of
 incompatible options; it now simply ignores --numbered-files as no files
 are produced anyway.

* "git-ls-files --deleted" did not work well with GIT_DIR&GIT_WORK_TREE.

* "git-read-tree A B C..." without -m option has been broken for a long
 time.

* git-send-email ignored --in-reply-to when --no-thread was given.

* 'git-submodule add' did not tolerate extra slashes and ./ in the path it
 accepted from the command line; it now is more lenient.

* git-svn misbehaved when the project contained a path that began with
 two dashes.

* import-zips script (in contrib) did not compute the common directory
 prefix correctly.

* miscompilation of negated enum constants by old gcc (2.9) affected the
 codepaths to spawn subprocesses.

Many small documentation updates are included as well.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Changes since v1.6.2.1 are as follows:

Allan Caffee (1):
     Documentation: update graph api example.

Brandon Casey (1):
     git-branch: display "was sha1" on branch deletion rather than just "sha1"

Carlo Marcelo Arenas Belon (1):
     documentation: update cvsimport description of "-r" for recent clone

Daniel Barkalow (1):
     Give error when no remote is configured

Daniel Cheng (aka SDiZ) (1):
     Fix bash completion in path with spaces

David Aguilar (1):
     everyday: use the dashless form of git-init

David J. Mellor (12):
     Documentation: minor grammatical fixes in git-archive.txt.
     Documentation: reword the "Description" section of git-bisect.txt.
     Documentation: minor grammatical fixes in git-blame.txt.
     Documentation: minor grammatical fixes in git-branch.txt.
     Documentation: reworded the "Description" section of git-bisect.txt.
     Documentation: reword example text in git-bisect.txt.
     Documentation: remove some uses of the passive voice in git-bisect.txt
     Documentation: minor grammatical fixes and rewording in git-bundle.txt
     Documentation: minor grammatical fixes in git-cat-file.txt
     Documentation: minor grammatical fixes in git-check-attr.txt
     Documentation: minor grammatical fix in git-check-ref-format.txt
     Documentation: Remove spurious uses of "you" in git-bisect.txt.

Emil Sit (1):
     test-lib: Clean up comments and Makefile.

Eric Wong (1):
     git-svn: fix ls-tree usage with dash-prefixed paths

Holger Weiß (1):
     Documentation: Remove an odd "instead"

Jeff King (3):
     doc: clarify how -S works
     ls-files: require worktree when --deleted is given
     fix portability problem with IS_RUN_COMMAND_ERR

Johannes Schindelin (4):
     rsync transport: allow local paths, and fix tests
     Smudge the files fed to external diff and textconv
     import-zips: fix thinko
     mailmap: resurrect lower-casing of email addresses

Johannes Sixt (2):
     Propagate --exec-path setting to external commands via GIT_EXEC_PATH
     diff --no-index: Do not generate patch output if other output is requested

Junio C Hamano (6):
     read-tree A B C: do not create a bogus index and do not segfault
     Remove total confusion from git-fetch and git-push
     blame: read custom grafts given by -S before calling setup_revisions()
     Update draft release notes to 1.6.2.2
     Update draft release notes to 1.6.2.2
     GIT 1.6.2.2

Linus Torvalds (1):
     close_sha1_file(): make it easier to diagnose errors

Michael J Gruber (2):
     git submodule: Add test cases for git submodule add
     git submodule: Fix adding of submodules at paths with ./, .. and //

Nico -telmich- Schottelius (1):
     git-tag(1): add hint about commit messages

Nicolas Pitre (1):
     avoid possible overflow in delta size filtering computation

René Scharfe (3):
     diffcore-pickaxe: use memmem()
     optimize compat/ memmem()
     pickaxe: count regex matches only once

Shawn O. Pearce (1):
     Increase the size of the die/warning buffer to avoid truncation

Stephen Boyd (1):
     format-patch: --numbered-files and --stdout aren't mutually exclusive

Thomas Rast (4):
     send-email: respect in-reply-to regardless of threading
     send-email: test --no-thread --in-reply-to combination
     Documentation: format-patch --root clarifications
     bash completion: only show 'log --merge' if merging</pre>

= Update notes =

As this release doesn't contain any bug fixes which impact my [[Git]] usage I won't be bothering with updating.
