---
tags: git wiki
---

From the official announcement posted to the [Git mailing list](/wiki/Git_mailing_list):

    A release candidate Git 1.7.2.rc1 is available at the usual places
    for testing:

     http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/

     git-1.7.2.rc1.tar.{gz,bz2}			(source tarball)
     git-htmldocs-1.7.2.rc1.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)
     git-manpages-1.7.2.rc1.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)

    The RPM binary packages for a few architectures are found in:

     testing/git-*-1.7.2.rc1-1.fc11.$arch.rpm	(RPM)

    ----------------------------------------------------------------

    Git v1.7.2 Release Notes (draft)
    ================================

    Updates since v1.7.1
    --------------------

    * core.eol configuration and eol attribute are the new way to control
      the end of line conventions for files in the working tree;
      core.autocrlf overrides it, keeping the traditional behaviour by
      default.

    * The whitespace rules used in "git apply --whitespace" and "git diff"
      gained a new member in the family (tab-in-indent) to help projects with
      policy to indent only with spaces.

    * When working from a subdirectory, by default, git does not look for its
      metadirectory ".git" across filesystems, primarily to help people who
      have invocations of git in their custom PS1 prompts, as being outside
      of a git repository would look for ".git" all the way up to the root
      directory, and NFS mounts are often slow.  DISCOVERY_ACROSS_FILESYSTEM
      environment variable can be used to tell git not to stop at a
      filesystem boundary.

    * Usage help messages generated by parse-options library (i.e. most
      of the Porcelain commands) are sent to the standard output now.

    * ':/<string>' notation to look for a commit now takes regular expression
      and it is not anchored at the beginning of the commit log message
      anymore (this is a backward incompatible change).

    * "git" wrapper learned "-c name=value" option to override configuration
      variable from the command line.

    * Improved portability for various platforms including older SunOS,
      HP-UX 10/11, AIX, Tru64, etc. and platforms with Python 2.4.

    * The message from "git am -3" has been improved when conflict
      resolution ended up making the patch a no-op.

    * "git blame" applies the textconv filter to the contents it works
      on, when available.

    * "git checkout --orphan newbranch" is similar to "-b newbranch" but
      prepares to create a root commit that is not connected to any existing
      commit.

    * "git cherry-pick" learned to pick a range of commits
      (e.g. "cherry-pick A..B" and "cherry-pick --stdin"); this does not
      have nicer sequencing control "rebase [-i]" has, though.

    * "git cvsserver" can be told to use pserver; its password file can be
      stored outside the repository.

    * The output from the textconv filter used by "git diff" can be cached to
      speed up their reuse.

    * "git diff --word-diff=<mode>" extends the existing "--color-words"
      option, making it more useful in color-challenged environments.

    * The regexp to detect function headers used by "git diff" for PHP has
      been enhanced for visibility modifiers (public, protected, etc.) to
      better support PHP5.

    * "diff.noprefix" configuration variable can be used to implicitly
      ask for "diff --no-prefix" behaviour.

    * "git for-each-ref" learned "%(objectname:short)" that gives the object
      name abbreviated.

    * "git format-patch" learned --signature option and format.signature
      configuration variable to customize the e-mail signature used in the
      output.

    * Various options to "git grep" (e.g. --count, --name-only) work better
      with binary files.

    * "git grep" learned "-Ovi" to open the files with hits in yoru editor.

    * "git help -w" learned "chrome" and "chromium" browsers.

    * "git log --decorate" shows commit decorations in various colours.

    * "git log --follow <path>" follows across copies (it used to only follow
      renames).  This may make the processing more expensive.

    * "git log --pretty=format:<template>" specifier learned "% <something>"
      magic that inserts a space only when %<something> expands to a
      non-empty string; this is similar to "%+<something>" magic, but is
      useful in a context to generate a single line output.

    * "git notes prune" learned "-n" (dry-run) and "-v" options, similar to
      what "git prune" has.

    * "git patch-id" can be fed a mbox without getting confused by the
      signature line in the format-patch output.

    * "git remote" learned "set-branches" subcommand.

    * "git revert" learned --strategy option to specify the merge strategy.

    * "git rev-list A..B" learned --ancestry-path option to further limit
      the result to the commits that are on the ancestry chain between A and
      B (i.e. commits that are not descendants of A are excluded).

    * "git show -5" is equivalent to "git show --do-walk 5"; this is similar
      to the update to make "git show master..next" walk the history,
      introduced in 1.6.4.

    * "git status [-s] --ignored" can be used to list ignored paths.

    * "git status -s -b" shows the current branch in the output.

    * "git status" learned "--ignore-submodules" option.

    * Various "gitweb" enhancements and clean-ups, including syntax
      highlighting, "plackup" support for instaweb, .fcgi suffix to run
      it as FastCGI script, etc.


    Fixes since v1.7.1
    ------------------

    All of the fixes in v1.7.1.X maintenance series are included in this
    release, unless otherwise noted.

    * We didn't URL decode "file:///path/to/repo" correctly when path/to/repo
      had percent-encoded characters (638794c, 9d2e942).

    * "git commit" did not honor GIT_REFLOG_ACTION environment variable, resulting
      reflog messages for cherry-pick and revert actions to be recorded as "commit".

    * "git clone/fetch/pull" issued an incorrect error message when a ref and
      a symref that points to the ref were updated at the same time.  This
      obviously would update them to the same value, and should not result in
      an error condition (0e71bc3).

    * "git clone" did not configure remote.origin.url correctly for bare
      clones (df61c889).

    * "git diff" inside a tree with many pathnames that have certain
      characters has become very slow in 1.7.0 by mistake (will merge
      e53e6b443 to 'maint').

    * "git diff --graph" works better with "--color-words" and other options
      (81fa024..4297c0a).

    * "git diff" could show ambiguous abbreviation of blob object names on
      its "index" line (3e5a188).

    * "git rebase" did not faithfully reproduce a malformed author ident, that
      is often seen in a repository converted from foreign SCMs (43c23251).

    * "git reset --hard" started from a wrong directory and a working tree in
      a nonstandard location is in use got confused (560fb6a1).

    ----------------------------------------------------------------

    Changes since v1.7.2-rc0 are as follows:

    Andrew Sayers (2):
         bash-completion: Fix __git_ps1 to work with "set -u"
         bash completion: Support "divergence from upstream" messages in __git_ps1

    Brandon Casey (4):
         t/lib-pager.sh: remove unnecessary '^' from 'expr' regular expression
         t/t7811-grep-open.sh: ensure fake "less" is made executable
         t/t7811-grep-open.sh: remove broken/redundant creation of fake "less" script
         t/t9001: use egrep when regular expressions are involved

    Brian Gernhardt (1):
         t4027,4041: Use test -s to test for an empty file

    Christian Couder (1):
         revert: accept arbitrary rev-list options

    Jeff King (1):
         notes: check number of parameters to "git notes copy"

    Jens Lehmann (4):
         git diff: rename test that had a conflicting name
         Add optional parameters to the diff option "--ignore-submodules"
         git submodule: ignore dirty submodules for summary and status
         Add the option "--ignore-submodules" to "git status"

    Johannes Schindelin (3):
         Unify code paths of threaded greps
         grep: Add the option '--open-files-in-pager'
         grep -O: allow optional argument specifying the pager (or editor)

    Jonathan Nieder (3):
         grep: refactor grep_objects loop into its own function
         t3508 (cherry-pick): futureproof against unmerged files
         revert: do not rebuild argv on heap

    Julian Phillips (6):
         string_list: Fix argument order for print_string_list
         string_list: Fix argument order for for_each_string_list
         string_list: Fix argument order for string_list_insert
         string_list: Fix argument order for string_list_insert_at_index
         string_list: Fix argument order for string_list_lookup
         string_list: Fix argument order for string_list_append

    Junio C Hamano (5):
         url_decode: URL scheme ends with a colon and does not require a slash
         Update draft release notes to 1.7.1.1
         Git 1.7.1.1
         git.spec.in: Add gitweb subpackage
         Git 1.7.2-rc1

    Michael J Gruber (4):
         t6018: add tests for rev-list's --branches and --tags
         t6018: make sure all tested symbolic names are different revs
         git-rev-parse.txt: Document ":path" specifier
         git-rev-parse.txt: Add more examples for caret and colon

    Nazri Ramliy (5):
         commit.h: add 'type' to struct name_decoration
         log-tree.c: Use struct name_decoration's type for classifying decoration
         log --decorate: Colorize commit decorations
         Allow customizable commit decorations colors
         Add test for correct coloring of git log --decoration

    Ramsay Allan Jones (2):
         msvc: Select the "fast" definition of the {get,put}_be32() macros
         notes: Initialise variable to appease gcc

    Thomas Rast (1):
         rev-list: introduce --count option
