---
tags: git
---
== Release announcement ==

From the official post to the [[Git]] mailing list by the Git maintainer, Junio Hamano:

<pre>The latest maintenance release GIT 1.6.1.3 is available at the
usual places:

 http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/

 git-1.6.1.3.tar.{gz,bz2}			(source tarball)
 git-htmldocs-1.6.1.3.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)
 git-manpages-1.6.1.3.tar.{gz,bz2}		(preformatted docs)

The RPM binary packages for a few architectures are also provided
as courtesy.

 RPMS/$arch/git-*-1.6.1.3-1.fc9.$arch.rpm	(RPM)

GIT v1.6.1.3 Release Notes
==========================

Fixes since v1.6.1.2
--------------------

* "git diff --binary | git apply" pipeline did not work well when
 a binary blob is changed to a symbolic link.

* Some combinations of -b/-w/--ignore-space-at-eol to "git diff" did
 not work as expected.

* "git grep" did not pass the -I (ignore binary) option when
 calling out an external grep program.

* "git log" and friends include HEAD to the set of starting points
 when --all is given.  This makes a difference when you are not
 on any branch.

* "git mv" to move an untracked file to overwrite a tracked
 contents misbehaved.

* "git merge -s octopus" with many potential merge bases did not
 work correctly.

* RPM binary package installed the html manpages in a wrong place.

Also includes minor documentation fixes and updates.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Changes since v1.6.1.2 are as follows:

Anders Melchiorsen (2):
     Documentation: more git push examples
     Documentation: rework src/dst description in git push

David J. Mellor (1):
     Fixed broken git help -w when installing from RPM

Guanqun Lu (2):
     fix typo in Documentation
     add test-dump-cache-tree in Makefile

Johannes Schindelin (2):
     revision walker: include a detached HEAD in --all
     apply: fix access to an uninitialized mode variable, found by valgrind

Junio C Hamano (6):
     bundle: allow the same ref to be given more than once
     Documentation: simplify refspec format description
     diff.c: output correct index lines for a split diff
     builtin-apply.c: do not set bogus mode in check_preimage() for deleted path
     grep: pass -I (ignore binary) down to external grep
     GIT 1.6.1.3

Keith Cascio (2):
     test more combinations of ignore-whitespace options to diff
     Fix combined use of whitespace ignore options to diff

Linus Torvalds (1):
     Wrap inflate and other zlib routines for better error reporting

Matthieu Moy (3):
     Missing && in t/t7001.sh.
     Add a testcase for "git mv -f" on untracked files.
     builtin-mv.c: check for unversionned files before looking at the destination.

René Scharfe (1):
     merge: fix out-of-bounds memory access

SZEDER Gábor (1):
     Fix gitdir detection when in subdir of gitdir

Stefan Naewe (1):
     urls.txt: document optional port specification in git URLS

William Pursell (1):
     User-manual: "git stash <comment>" form is long gone</pre>

== See also ==

* [[Updating to Git 1.6.1.3]]
