---
tags:
---
The [[Knowledge Base]] is a collection of useful information compiled by [[Wincent Colaiuta]] about topics of interest to users of [[Mac OS X]]. Many of the articles will be of particular interest to developers although the scope of the [[Knowledge Base]] extends beyond development and even beyond [[Mac OS X]] in many cases. Basically, I try to make a point of recording here useful stuff that I may want to remember in the future. I am making it publicly available because it may be of use to others as well.

Note that the information published here is provided as a free public service without any guarantees or warranties of any kind. I hope that it may prove useful to you but you use this information at your own risk. It is not legal, medical, technical or any other kind of professional advice. See the [[Knowledge_Base:General_disclaimer | disclaimer]] for more details.

This is the new [[wincent.com]] [[Knowledge base]] intended to replace the old Knowledge base at http://wincent.com/a/knowledge-base/. The old Knowledge base was powered by [[Movable Type]] which despite my efforts at organizing things using hierarchical categories was not very well suited to the task (it is, after all, [[weblog]] software). The new Knowledge base is in [[wiki]] format, a much better fit for the task at hand, and uses the same [[MediaWiki]] software that powers [[Wikipedia]].

The plan is that eventually all content will be migrated from the old Knowledge base to the new one. For the time being the content will remain in place at the old [[URL]] and the links on the rest of the site have not yet been updated to point to this [[wiki]].
