---
tags:
---
Disappointed with the [[WordPress]] security track record, I've decided to remove it from my systems. The straw that broke the camel's back was a [http://wordpress.org/development/2007/03/upgrade-212/ cracker replacing the official WordPress 2.1.1 archive on wordpress.org with a trojan].

This decision was made in the context of the [[Month of PHP Bugs]] (highlighting security problems with [[PHP]] in general) and after a series of [/tags/wordpress WordPress upgrades due to security problems]. The problem is that [[WordPress]] simply doesn't have the security required of a public-facing, network-enabled application. These upgrades are more or less forced upgrades (that is, "upgrade or your server might get 'owned'"). I am a little tired of having to invest the time required to install all these updates (and not just to [[WordPress]] but also [[UBB.threads]] and [[MediaWiki]] as well) so I decided to retire my existing [[WordPress]] install and replace it with a static mirror of the existing dynamic content.

I made this decision even though I was not exposed to any risk because of my [[Subversion]]-based upgrade policy (see "[[Upgrading WordPress using Subversion]]"). Among other issues, I don't think the vulnerability disclosure practices of the [[WordPress]] team are really up to scratch. The just-released version 2.1.2 actually includes a fix for another security flaw. The [http://wordpress.org/development/2007/03/upgrade-212/|official announcement] states that it "includes minor updates", but that's not really an accurate description of what got fixed (an [http://trac.wordpress.org/ticket/3879|XSS vulnerability]).

So I mirrored my existing dynamic content using [[wget]]:

<pre>wget -m -k -K -E "http://example.com/path-to-word-press-installation/"</pre>

And uploaded it to the server in the place of my [[WordPress]] install. No more updates or security holes to worry about, ever!

= See also =

* [[Slashdot]] coverage of 2.1.1 incident: http://it.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=07/03/03/0427211
* [[Netcraft]] coverage: http://news.netcraft.com/archives/2007/03/03/wordpress_distribution_compromised_update_released.html
* Other reactions: http://fukamachi.org/wp/2007/03/03/wordpress-211-dangerous-upgrade-to-212/
