---
tags: red.hat cyrus
cache_breaker: 1
---
== Background ==

As part of my migration from [[Rackspace]] to [[INetU]] I moved from [[RHEL 3]] to [[RHEL 5.1]]. I saw it as an opportunity to do a bit of "spring cleaning" and select the most up-to-date, standard, supported, [[Red Hat]]-backed tools that I could.

Part of that entailed moving from [[UW-IMAP]] on the old server to [[Cyrus]] on the new server (the supported options on [[RHEL 5.1]] were Cyrus and [[Courier]]; I chose Cyrus purely because it was listed in the [[Red Hat]] [[docs]] as the "standard" [[IMAP]] software, despite the fact that I had previous experience with Courier on [[FreeBSD]]).

I created local user accounts (real accounts, but without shell access) for each email account and enabled [[Cyrus]] in  `/etc/mail/sendmail.mc` as suggested in the comments:

<pre>dnl # For using Cyrus-IMAPd as POP3/IMAP server through LMTP delivery uncomment
dnl # the following 2 definitions and activate below in the MAILER section the
dnl # cyrusv2 mailer.
dnl #
dnl define(`confLOCAL_MAILER', `cyrusv2')dnl
dnl define(`CYRUSV2_MAILER_ARGS', `FILE /var/lib/imap/socket/lmtp')dnl</pre>

Little did I know that this would end up causing me problems later.

== The mailstorm problem ==

In the configuration suggested above you could find yourself on the receiving end of a mailstorm. This stems from the fact that [[Cyrus]] is designed to work with "virtual" accounts (not real accounts on the system), and so [[sendmail]] has no way of knowing whether email accounts really exist. Furthermore, the Cyrus mailboxes are in a custom format which sendmail can't write to and so it must delegate responsibility for this to Cyrus.

The mailstorm problem therefore arises as follows:

# Spammers connect to [[sendmail]]
# Attempt to send to dozens, hundreds or thousands of addresses, most of which do not exist
# Sendmail accepts all the messages, then passes them on to [[Cyrus]]
# Cyrus generates a bounce for each non-existent user
# Bounce message is transmitted by sendmail to remote hosts, but in many or most cases the spammer has used a false email address, so the bounce is itself bounced back to the local postmaster

So this is really a double problem because you're generated bounces which you shouldn't be generating (better to refuse delivery as soon as the spammer attempts to deliver to a non-existent user) and then again because most of your bounces generated another wave of bounces, but these latter ones pile up in your postmaster inbox.

== One solution ==

One solution is to somehow teach [[Sendmail]] to query [[Cyrus]] about whether a user account exists in real time. Then it can refuse delivery immediately for non-existent users and no bounce message is generated, solving the mailstorm problem.

I tried for many hours to get this solution working but I was unable to iron out all the flaws. As soon as I got real-time look-ups working (using the [[smmapd]] provided with [[Cryus]] and some custom [[Sendmail]] configuration) I found that incoming mail deliveries were seemingly getting dropped on the floor. In reality they were actually getting delivered via the local mailer to `/var/spool/mail` rather than to the Cyrus mailboxes, so no mail was really lost.

== Another solution ==

I finally managed to get an alternative solution working, enabled by the fact that my email accounts are actual [[UNIX]] user accounts, even though they don't have login shells. My solution was to disable all [[Cyrus]]-related directives in the `sendmail.mc` &mdash; I had only used them because the comments seemed to indicate that this was "the" way to set things up &mdash; and instead use [[Procmail]] as a local delivery agent.

[[Procmail]] can easily pass emails on to [[Cyrus]] using the `deliver` program, but by the time [[sendmail]] even invokes procmail it has already checked if a corresponding local user exists and can refuse spam for non-existent users at the right time and thus avoid mailstorms.

[[Procmail]] has another benefit which is that it affords easy insertion of other filters into the mail flow ([[SpamAssassin]], for example) and allows for per-user customization.

== Yet another solution ==

Another solution, also leveraging the existence of real [[UNIX]] accounts for email, was suggested to me but I never tested it. The idea is to use the [[Cyrus]] mailer but have [[sendmail]] check for the existence of local accounts first:

 MODIFY_MAILER_FLAGS(`CYRUSV2',`+w')

== Ensuring that Cyrus launches on boot ==

When I first set up [[Cyrus]] I left the machine running for over 200 hundred days until it was time to update to a new version of the kernel. Upon rebooting, mail services didn't come back up and the server was issuing temporary failure notices because I had forgotten a key step in the configuration; telling the service to start up Cyrus at boot time:

 sudo chkconfig cyrus-impad on
