---
tags: gpg
---
I just started using `gpg-agent` for the first time on [[OS X]]. Coming from my familiarity with `ssh-agent` and `ssh-add`, there were some surprises.

= Installation =

If you use [[Homebrew]], it's easy:

<pre lang="shell">$ brew install gpg-agent</pre>

But note, there is no [[man]] page ([http://linux.die.net/man/1/gpg-agent here] is one I found online), and for the `gpg-preset-passphrase` tool there is no man page  I could find at all (other than [http://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg-devel/gpg_002dpreset_002dpassphrase.html this document]).

= Use =

The reason I started investigating this is so I could do batch encryption and decryption from a within a shell script.

== Encryption ==

Here the command I want to run is something like:

<pre lang="shell">$ gpg -a -q --batch --no-tty --yes -r win@wincent.com -o $FILE.encrypted -e $FILE</pre>

Encryption is done with the public key, so you don't need to enter a passphrase, but I was nevertheless getting derailed by a prompt:

<pre>It is NOT certain that the key belongs to the person named
in the user ID.  If you *really* know what you are doing,
you may answer the next question with yes.</pre>

I believe the cause is that my key pair was generated on another machine, and when I switched machines, it lost its trust settings. They can be restored (to "ultimate" trust) with:

<pre lang="shell">$ gpg --edit-key win@wincent.com</pre>

and then entering `trust` at the prompt, entering and confirming the desired trust level (`5`) and then issuing a `quit`.

== Decryption ==

Decryption requires the private key, so to avoid entering a passphrase repeatedly, I wanted to use `gpg-agent`.

Specifically, the kind of command I wanted to run was like:

<pre lang="shell">$ gpg -q --yes --batch --no-tty --use-agent -o $OUTFILE -d $INFILE</pre>

Note the `--use-agent` switch which instructs `gpg` to try and use `gpg-agent`.

To make this work, we either need to do:

<pre lang="shell">$ eval $(gpg-agent --daemon --allow-preset-passphrase)</pre>

Or:

<pre lang="shell">$ eval $(gpg-agent --daemon)</pre>

(Which requires us to add `allow-preset-passphrase` in `~/.gnupg/gpg-agent.conf`.

This all works without the `allow-preset-passphrase` stuff, but the `gpg-agent` is configured to remember passphrases for only 600 seconds, unlike `ssh-agent`. It is possible to increase that time span with the `--default-cache-ttl` and `--max-cache-ttl` settings, but if you want to make it permanent you need to use the `gpg-preset-passphrase` tool.

This is where it gets tricky. As I said above, there is no man page. Furthermore, the tool is not installed in your `$PATH` by default, but can be found at `/usr/local/opt/gpg-agent/libexec/gpg-preset-passphrase` when installed via Homebrew.

Finally, you need a `KEYGRIP`, which [http://lists.gnupg.org/pipermail/gnupg-users/2010-January/037876.html this mailing list post] informs us is actually the fingerprint of the key, and not just the fingerprint, but the subkey fingerprint, which you can display with the arcane `gpg --fingerprint --fingerprint` command.

<pre lang="shell">$ KEYGRIP=$(gpg --fingerprint --fingerprint win@wincent.com | grep fingerprint | tail -1 | cut -d= -f2 | sed -e 's/ //g')
$ /usr/local/opt/gpg-agent/libexec/gpg-preset-passphrase --preset $KEYGRIP</pre>

That "remembers" passphrase for the given key. Note that whatever you type into standard in will be echoed directly to the screen without obfuscation, so be careful.

You can get the agent to "forget" the passphrase with:

<pre lang="shell">$ /usr/local/opt/gpg-agent/libexec/gpg-preset-passphrase --forget $KEYGRIP</pre>
