---
tags: zentest
---
= Release notes =

* http://rubyforge.org/frs/shownotes.php?release_id=18734

= See also =

* [[Upgrading to ZenTest 3.9.1 on Mac OS X 10.5.1]]

= My notes =

Apparently this release fixes a "memory leak". Hopefully this fixes an issue I saw last night; when I finished work for the day I left my machine running with autotest in a background window. So autotest was running the whole night even though no changes were being made to the files and no tests were being run. When I came back this morning the machine was thrashing and autotest was using almost 1.5 gig of resident memory (2 gig virtual). Perhaps there was a leak in the polling loop at the heart of autotest.

Currently running the following to see if the problem has gone away:

<pre> while true; do
  touch project_file_which_triggers_all_specs_to_run
  sleep 1
done</pre>

Can't find a live repository to look at what changed between 3.9.0 and 3.9.1 (the [[RubyForge]] [[Subversion]] repo seems to be a mere mirror and it's lagging behind, still at 3.8.0), but I have downloaded the two tarballs to do a straight diff on them:

<pre>diff -r -u ZenTest-3.9.0/History.txt ZenTest-3.9.1/History.txt
--- ZenTest-3.9.0/History.txt	2008-01-31 10:50:16.000000000 +0100
+++ ZenTest-3.9.1/History.txt	2008-02-01 04:26:40.000000000 +0100
@@ -1,3 +1,9 @@
+=== 3.9.1 / 2008-01-31
+
+* 1 bug fix:
+
+  * OMG I'm so dumb... fixed memory leak.
+
 === 3.9.0 / 2008-01-30
 
 * 15 minor enhancements:
diff -r -u ZenTest-3.9.0/lib/autotest.rb ZenTest-3.9.1/lib/autotest.rb
--- ZenTest-3.9.0/lib/autotest.rb	2008-01-31 10:50:16.000000000 +0100
+++ ZenTest-3.9.1/lib/autotest.rb	2008-02-01 04:26:40.000000000 +0100
@@ -211,11 +211,8 @@
         end
         wait_for_changes
       rescue Interrupt
-        if self.wants_to_quit then
-          break
-        else
-          reset
-        end
+        break if self.wants_to_quit
+        reset
       end
     end
     hook :quit
@@ -343,6 +340,7 @@
   def find_files
     result = {}
     targets = self.find_directories + self.extra_files
+    self.find_order.clear
 
     targets.each do |target|
       order = []
@@ -508,9 +506,7 @@
 
   def wait_for_changes
     hook :waiting
-    begin
-      Kernel.sleep self.sleep
-    end until find_files_to_test
+    Kernel.sleep self.sleep until find_files_to_test
   end
 
   ############################################################
diff -r -u ZenTest-3.9.0/lib/zentest.rb ZenTest-3.9.1/lib/zentest.rb
--- ZenTest-3.9.0/lib/zentest.rb	2008-01-31 10:50:16.000000000 +0100
+++ ZenTest-3.9.1/lib/zentest.rb	2008-02-01 04:26:41.000000000 +0100
@@ -56,7 +56,7 @@
 
 class ZenTest
 
-  VERSION = '3.9.0'
+  VERSION = '3.9.1'
 
   include ZenTestMapping
</pre>

So that missing <tt>self.find_order.clear</tt> could indeed explain the memory leak that I saw. Doesn't look like the code being tested is responsible for the leak (thank goodness, I hate trying to find memory leaks in Garbage Collected code). I've been running the test suite every second now for a few minutes and the memory usage is constant.
