---
title: Site updates 0.32
tags: site snippets
cache_breaker: 1
---

Look at commit 42e0f26 for evidence of a breach of discipline on my part. Out of habit, I was working directly on the master branch when [news of a security vulnerability](/snippets/19) in the Mail gem used by [Rails](/wiki/Rails) persuaded me to do [a hasty deployment](/snippets/20), even though I suspected that in my app the vulnerability in the gem was unlikely to be exploitable.

The breach of discipline referred to above was that I was working on the master branch when I should have been on a topic branch. I had a bunch of commits already pushed out, but the feature was not yet completed, so I couldn't use the tip of the master branch for deployment purposes.

Now I *could* have created another branch containing only the fix (eg. "security") and then deployed that, but I didn't really want to create another branch in the repo that I would then be obliged to keep around forever.

So I created a new branch for my topic (that's the "unobtrusive" branch mentioned in the commit message for 42e0f26) and then rewound the master branch and applied the security fix. This required a forced update when pushing, something which I only allowed myself to do because I am the sole consumer of this particular repo.

Once all this was done, I was free to merge the changes on the master branch into the "unobtrusive" topic branch (although I could have just rebased too, and perhaps I should have in order to hide this little slip up on my part). Finally when the topic was finished I could just merge the "unobtrusive" topic branch back into "master" and delete the former.

Lessons learned?

-   be more disciplined about using topic branches when starting on features or refactorings that will take many commits to complete
-   consider reviving the old "maint" branch that I used to use and keeping it around for these cases where you need to deploy a one-commit fix *right now*

It's funny. I stopped using the "maint" branch a while back because I thought it was a mistake (see [my blog post](/blog/thoughts-on-staging-environments-and-branches-for-web-apps), "Thoughts on staging environments and branches for web apps").

Now I'm thinking that I wasn't quite right there; while it's true that equating "master" with "staging" and "maint" with "production" is a mistake, I think this little episode clearly demonstrates the utility of having a "maint" branch which closely tracks the "master" branch, usually lagging a little behind (at the previously deployed commit) so that you can easily push out quick fixes when required. Keeping this kind of branch is dead easy in [Git](/wiki/Git), seeing as it will basically always be fast-forwarded.

    42e0f26 Merge branch 'master' into unobtrusive
    04e90cb Update to Steak 1.0.1
    950d776 Update database_cleaner to 0.6.1
    dc399b6 Update to Capybara 0.4.1.1
    97ce4fa Remove unnecessary require
    a1f119a deploy: bump Bundler version requirement to 1.0.9
    44f91e3 Update to jQuery 1.5
    840b85b Be more radical about avoiding HTML layout around non-HTML requests
    3e879aa Inline template_exists? method in JsController
    88d0e41 Drop unnecessary call to [/tags/scoped #scoped]
    df7b8cb Drop unnecessary parens
    d7df7bb Remove last use of #sort_options method
    3803ccf Remove #sort_options and #default_sort_options (now unused)
    c99119e Rename #arel_sort_options and #default_arel_sort_options
    e49fa5c Replace ternary with more concise && operator
    a5db146 Fix indenting
    d29cfdd Edit lib/sortable for brevity
    bba9ccd Remove unnecessary temporary variable
    5aaf171 Avoid repeated calls to [/tags/map #map] in lib/sortable
    d18370b Fix breakage in lib/sortable when no sort param present
    191c0b3 Use define_method rather than class_eval in lib/sortable
    a79fc60 Make controller instance methods added by lib/sortable private
    bbf719a Temporarily revert 840b85b (layout suppression for non-HTML requests)
    089b4b2 Unobtrusive topic deletion with graceful degradation
    8f1379f Make #button_to_destroy_model degrade gracefully
    c3a142c Drop explicit call to polymorphic_path
    71ed189 Implement graceful degredation for comment destruction
    5de7f2b Remove superfluous button_to_destroy_{issue,topic,comment} helpers
    447410a Remove button_to_destroy_page helper
    df6aa2a Update stale routing spec to reflect newly added routes
    96f7a3a Add unobtrusive AJAX-y post deletion in admin/posts
    6240c6f Replace longhand button_to call with shortcut helper call
    810a20d Remove non-functional tag destroy button
    3158b47 Use button_to_destroy_model helper in issue awaiting moderation template
    98ecfdd Add 'ham' button to issue awaiting moderation template
    8ad41e4 Use button_to_destroy_model helper in issues#show
    31b727a Implement link deletion
    11896cb Add destroy button to links#edit
    fd01aac Use #button_to_destroy_model in repos#edit
    00f9340 Use #button_to_destroy_model in snippets#edit
    ac9cf6f Comment out non-functional tag delete button in tags#edit
    c82c3c6 Use #button_to_destroy_model in tweets#edit
    abb624e Mark a tags#edit view spec as pending
    bbe76bd deploy: insist on having Bundler 1.0.10 on the server
